The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Game of Go, by Arthur Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Game of Go
       The National Game of Japan

Author: Arthur Smith

Release Date: October 30, 2021 [eBook #66632]

Language: English


Produced by: Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net/ for Project Gutenberg (This file
             was produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GAME OF GO ***



                             THE GAME OF GO

                       THE NATIONAL GAME OF JAPAN


                                   BY
                              ARTHUR SMITH

                                   圍碁

                                NEW YORK
                         MOFFAT, YARD & COMPANY
                                  1908








PREFACE


This book is intended as a practical guide to the game of Go. It is
especially designed to assist students of the game who have acquired a
smattering of it in some way and who wish to investigate it further at
their leisure.

As far as I know there is no work in the English language on the game
of Go as played in Japan. There is an article on the Chinese game by Z.
Volpicelli, in Vol. XXVI of the “Journal of the China Branch of the
Royal Asiatic Society.” This article I have not consulted. There is
also a short description of the Japanese game in a work on “Korean
Games with Notes on the Corresponding Games of China and Japan,” by
Stewart Culin, but this description would be of little practical use in
learning to play the game.

There is, however, an exhaustive treatise on the game in German by O.
Korschelt. This can be found in Parts 21–24 of the “Mittheilungen der
deutschen Gesellschaft für Natur- und Völkerkunde Ostasiens.” The
student could readily learn the game from Herr Korschelt’s article if
it were available, but his work has not been translated, and it is
obtainable only in a few libraries in this country. In the preparation
of this book I have borrowed freely from Herr Korschelt’s work,
especially in the chapter devoted to the history of the game, and I
have also adopted many of his illustrative games and problems.

Herr Korschelt was an excellent player, and acquired his knowledge of
the game from Murase Shuho, who was the best player in Japan at the
time his article was written (about 1880).

My acquaintance with the game has been acquired from Mr. Mokichi
Nakamura, a Japanese resident of this country, who is an excellent
player, and whose enthusiasm for the game led me to attempt this book.
Mr. Nakamura has also supplied much of the material which I have used
in it. Toward the end I have had the expert assistance of Mr. Jihei
Hashiguchi, with whom readers of the New York Sun are already
acquainted.

Wherever possible I have given the Japanese words and phrases which are
used in playing the game, and for those who are not familiar with the
system of writing Japanese with Roman characters, I may say that the
consonants have the sounds used in English, and the vowels the sounds
that are used in Italian, all the final vowels being sounded. Thus,
“dame” is pronounced as though spelled “dahmay.”


                                                 New York, April, 1908.








INTRODUCTION


The game of Go belongs to the class of games of which our Chess, though
very dissimilar, is an example. It is played on a board, and is a game
of pure skill, into which the element of chance does not enter;
moreover, it is an exceedingly difficult game to learn, and no one can
expect to acquire the most superficial knowledge of it without many
hours of hard work. It is said in Japan that a player with ordinary
aptitude for the game would have to play ten thousand games in order to
attain professional rank of the lowest degree. When we think that it
would take twenty-seven years to play ten thousand games at the rate of
one game per day, we can get some idea of the Japanese estimate of its
difficulty. The difficulty of the game and the remarkable amount of
time and labor which it is necessary to expend in order to become even
a moderately good player, are the reasons why Go has not spread to
other countries since Japan has been opened to foreign intercourse. For
the same reasons few foreigners who live there have become familiar
with it.

On the other hand, its intense interest is attested by the following
saying of the Japanese: “Go uchi wa oya no shini me ni mo awanu,” which
means that a man playing the game would not leave off even to be
present at the death-bed of a parent. I have found that beginners in
this country to whom I have shown the game always seem to find it
interesting, although so far I have known no one who has progressed
beyond the novice stage. The more it is played the more its beauties
and opportunities for skill become apparent, and it may be
unhesitatingly recommended to that part of the community, however small
it may be, for whom games requiring skill and patience have an
attraction.

It is natural to compare it with our Chess, and it may safely be said
that Go has nothing to fear from the comparison. Indeed, it is not too
much to say that it presents even greater opportunities for foresight
and keen analysis.

The Japanese also play Chess, which they call “Shogi,” but it is
slightly different from our Chess, and their game has not been so well
developed.

Go, on the other hand, has been zealously played and scientifically
developed for centuries, and as will appear more at length in the
chapter on the History of the Game, it has, during part of this time,
been recognized and fostered by the government. Until recently a
systematic treatment of the game, such as we are accustomed to in our
books on Chess, has been lacking in Japan. A copious literature had
been produced, but it consisted mostly of collections of illustrative
and annotated games, and the Go masters seem to have had a desire to
make their marginal annotations as brief as possible, in order to
compel the beginner to go to the master for instruction and to learn
the game only by hard practice.

Chess and Go are both in a sense military games, but the military
tactics that are represented in Chess are of a past age, in which the
king himself entered the conflict—his fall generally meaning the loss
of the battle—and in which the victory or defeat was brought about by
the courage of single noblemen rather than through the fighting of the
common soldiers.

Go, on the other hand, is not merely a picture of a single battle like
Chess, but of a whole campaign of a modern kind, in which the
strategical movements of the masses in the end decide the victory.
Battles occur in various parts of the board, and sometimes several are
going on at the same time. Strong positions are besieged and captured,
and whole armies are cut off from their line of communications and are
taken prisoners unless they can fortify themselves in impregnable
positions, and a far-reaching strategy alone assures the victory.

It is difficult to say which of the two games gives more pleasure. The
combinations in Go suffer in comparison with those of Chess by reason
of a certain monotony, because there are no pieces having different
movements, and because the stones are not moved again after once being
placed on the board. Also to a beginner the play, especially in the
beginning of the game, seems vague; there are so many points on which
the stones may be played, and the amount of territory obtainable by one
move or the other seems hopelessly indefinite. This objection is more
apparent than real, and as one’s knowledge of the game grows, it
becomes apparent that the first stones must be played with great care,
and that there are certain definite, advantageous positions, which
limit the player in his choice of moves, just as the recognized Chess
openings guide our play in that game. Stones so played in the opening
are called “Joseki” by the Japanese. Nevertheless, I think that in the
early part of the game the play is somewhat indefinite for any player
of ordinary skill. On the other hand, these considerations are balanced
by the greater number of combinations and by the greater number of
places on the board where conflicts take place. As a rule it may be
said that two average players of about equal strength will find more
pleasure in Go than in Chess, for in Chess it is almost certain that
the first of two such players who loses a piece will lose the game, and
further play is mostly an unsuccessful struggle against certain defeat.
In Go, on the other hand, a severe loss does not by any means entail
the loss of the game, for the player temporarily worsted can betake
himself to another portion of the field where, for the most part
unaffected by the reverse already suffered, he may gain a compensating
advantage.

A peculiar charm of Go lies in the fact that through the so-called “Ko”
an apparently severe loss may often be made a means of securing a
decisive advantage in another portion of the board. A game is so much
the more interesting the oftener the opportunities for victory or
defeat change, and in Chess these chances do not change often, seldom
more than twice. In Go, on the other hand, they change much more
frequently, and sometimes just at the end of the game, perhaps in the
last moments, an almost certain defeat may by some clever move be
changed into a victory.

There is another respect in which Go is distinctly superior to Chess.
That is in the system of handicapping. When handicaps are given in
Chess, the whole opening is more or less spoiled, and the scale of
handicaps, from the Bishop’s Pawn to Queen’s Rook, is not very
accurate; and in one variation of the Muzio gambit, so far from being a
handicap, it is really an advantage to the first player to give up the
Queen’s Knight. In Go, on the other hand, the handicaps are in a
progressive scale of great accuracy, they have been given from the
earliest times, and the openings with handicaps have been studied quite
as much as those without handicaps.

In regard to the time required to play a game of Go, it may be said
that ordinary players finish a game in an hour or two, but as in Chess,
a championship game may be continued through several sittings, and may
last eight or ten hours. There is on record, however, an authentic
account of a game that was played for the championship at Yeddo during
the Shogunate, which lasted continuously nine days and one night.

Before taking up a description of the board and stones and the rules of
play, we will first outline a history of the game.








CONTENTS


                                                           PAGE
    Introduction                                            vii

    CHAPTER I
    History of the Game                                       1

    CHAPTER II
    Description of the Board and Stones                      18

    CHAPTER III
    Rules of Play                                            26

    CHAPTER IV
    General Methods of Play and Terminology of the Game      57

    CHAPTER V
    Illustrative Games                                       68

    CHAPTER VI
    “Joseki” and Openings                                   119

    CHAPTER VII
    The End Game                                            186

    CHAPTER VIII
    Problems                                                201








ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                                PAGE
    Sato Tadanobu, a Samurai of the Twelfth Century,
    defending himself with a “goban,” when attacked
    by his enemies                                      Frontispiece
    Playing Go                                                    22








I

HISTORY OF THE GAME


The game of Go is probably the oldest of all known games. It was played
by the Chinese from earliest antiquity, and has been played in its
present form by the Japanese for over eleven centuries, but while the
game originated in China, the Japanese have far surpassed the Chinese
in skill at the game, and it has come to be regarded in Japan as their
national game.

In the old Chinese works three persons are named as the originators of
the game, but in Japan its invention is commonly attributed to only one
of these. This man is the Chinese emperor Shun, who reigned from 2255
to 2206 B.C. It is said that this emperor invented the game in order to
strengthen the weak mind of his son Shang Kiun. By others the invention
of the game is attributed to the predecessor of Shun, the emperor Yao,
who reigned from 2357 to 2256 B.C. If this theory is correct it would
make the game about forty-two hundred years old. The third theory is
that Wu, a vassal of the Chinese emperor Kieh Kwei (1818–1767 B.C.)
invented the game of Go. To the same man is often attributed the
invention of games of cards. It would seem that this last theory is the
most credible, because it would make the invention more recent, and
because the inventor is said to have been a vassal and not an emperor.

Whatever may be the truth in regard to the origin of the game, it is
perfectly certain that Go was already known in China in early
antiquity. In old Chinese works, of which the oldest is dated about a
thousand years before Christ, a game which can be easily recognized as
Go is mentioned casually, so that at that time it must have been well
known.

We are told also that in China somewhere about 200 B.C., poetry and Go
went hand in hand, and were in high favor, and a poet, Bayu, who lived
about the year 240 A.D., made himself famous through poems in which he
sang the praises of the game.

It is remarkable that in the old books it is stated that in the year
300 A.D. a man by the name of Osan was so skilled in Go that he could
take all the stones from the board after the game had been finished and
then play it over from memory. This is of interest also as showing that
in the course of time playing the game has had the effect of
strengthening the memory of Go players, because there are now hundreds
of players in Japan who can replace a game move for move after it has
been disarranged. It is in fact the customary thing for a teacher of
the game to play the game over in that way in order to criticise the
moves made by the student.

Anecdotes have come down to us from the old Chinese times in regard to
the game, of which we will mention only one, which shows how highly it
was esteemed.

Sha An, a man who lived in the time of the Tsin Dynasty (265–419 A.D.),
carried on a war with his nephew Sha Gen. Growing tired of taking life,
they left the victory to be decided by a game of Go, which they played
against each other.

The esteem in which players were held in the old Chinese times is also
shown by the titles with which they were honored; to wit, “Kisei” or
“Ki Shing,” from “Ki,” meaning Go, and “Sei,” a holy man, and “Shing,”
magician or sage.

In the time of the Tang Dynasty (618–906 A.D.), and again during the
Sung Dynasty (960–1126 A.D.), the first books about Go were written.
The game then flourished in China, and there were then many
distinguished players in that country.

According to the Japanese reckoning of time, Go was introduced into
Japan in the period Tem pyo, during the reign of the emperor Shomu,
which according to the Chinese records was the thirteenth year of the
period Tien Tao, and during the reign of the emperor Huan Tsung.
According to our calendar this would be about the year 735 A.D.

A man otherwise well known in the history of Japan, Kibi Daijin, was
sent as an envoy to China in that year, and it is said that he brought
the game back with him to Japan.

Go may have been known in Japan before that date, but at any rate it
must have been known about this time, for in the seventh month of the
tenth year of the period Tem pyo (A.D. 738), we are told that a
Japanese nobleman named Kumoshi was playing Go with another nobleman
named Adzumabito, and that in a quarrel resulting from the game Kumoshi
killed Adzumabito with his sword.

On its introduction into Japan a new era opened in the development of
the game, but at first it spread very slowly, and it is mentioned a
hundred years later that the number of Go players among the nobility
(and to them the knowledge of the game was entirely confined) was very
small indeed.

In the period called Kasho (848–851 A.D.), and in Nin Ju (851–854
A.D.), a Japanese prince dwelt in China, and was there taught the game
by the best player in China. The following anecdote is told in regard
to this prince: that in order to do him honor the Chinese allowed him
to meet the best players, and in order to cope with them he hit upon
the idea of placing his stones exactly in the same way as those of his
opponent; that is to say, when his opponent placed a stone at any
point, he would place his stone on a point symmetrically opposite, and
in that way he is said to have won. In regard to this anecdote it may
be said that the Chinese must have been very weak players, or they
would speedily have found means of overcoming this method of defense.

We next hear that in the year 850 a Japanese named Wakino became famous
as a great devotee of the game. He played continuously day and night,
and became so engrossed in the game that he forgot everything else
absolutely.

In the next two centuries the knowledge of the game did not extend
beyond the court at Kioto. Indeed, it appears that it was forbidden to
play Go anywhere else than at court. At all events we are told that in
the period called Otoku (1084–1087 A.D.) the Prince of Dewa, whose name
was Kiowara no Mahira, secretly introduced the game into the province
of Oshu, and played there with his vassals. From that time not only the
number of the nobility who played the game increased rapidly, but the
common people as well began to take it up.

Our frontispiece illustrates an incident which is said to have occurred
about this time in the city of Kamakura. A samurai named Sato Tadanobu,
who was a vassal of Yoshitsune, a brother of Yoritomo, the first Shogun
of Japan, was playing Go in his house when he was suddenly attacked by
his enemies, and he is depicted using the “Goban” as a weapon wherewith
to defend himself. The print is by Kuniyoshi, and is one of a series
the title of which might be translated as “Our Favorite Hero Series.”
The “Go ban,” “Go ishi,” and “Go tsubo” look precisely like those which
are at present in use, but Kuniyoshi probably represented the type in
use in his day and not in the time of Yoritomo, as it is pretty well
settled that in the early times the board was smaller.

There is also a story which comes down from the Kamakura period in
regard to Hojo Yoshitoki. He is said to have been playing Go with a
guest at the moment that news arrived of the uprising of Wada
Yoshimori. Yoshitoki is said to have first finished the game in perfect
calmness before he thought of his measures for subduing the revolution.
This was in the first year of Kempo, or 1213 A.D.

In the beginning of the thirteenth century we find that Go was widely
known in the samurai class, and was played with zeal. At that time
everybody who went to war, from the most famous general down to the
meanest soldier, played the game. The board and stones were carried
with them to the field of battle, and as soon as the battle was over,
they were brought out, and the friendly strife began. Many of the monks
and poets of that period also had a taste for Go, and several of them
are mentioned as celebrated Go players.

All three of the great Japanese generals, Nobunaga, Hideyoshi, and
Iyeyasu, were devotees of the game. It is related that Nobunaga came to
Kioto in the tenth year of Ten Sho, 1582 A.D., and lived in the Honnoji
Temple. One night the celebrated Go player, Sansha, of whom more
hereafter, came and played with him until midnight. Sansha had scarcely
taken his departure when the uprising of Akechi Mitsuhide broke out.

In the periods Genki (1570–1572), Ten Sho (1573–1591) until Keicho
(1596–1614), and Gen Wa (1615–1623), there were many celebrated players
among the monks, poets, farmers and tradespeople. They were called to
the courts of the daimios and to the halls of the nobles, either in
order that the nobility might play with them, or more frequently merely
to exhibit their skill at the game. This custom existed up to the time
of the fall of the Shogunate.

That the Japanese could find pleasure in merely watching a game that is
so abstract in its nature and so difficult to understand is evidence of
the fact that they were then a highly cultivated people intellectually.
We find nothing like it in this country except in the narrowest Chess
circles.

In the beginning of the seventeenth century Go attained such a high
development that there appeared a series of expert players who far
surpassed anything known before. Of these the most famous were Honinbo
Sansha Hoin, Nakamura Doseki, Hayashi Rigen, Inouye Inseki, and Yasui
Santetsu.

Sansha was the son of a merchant of Kioto. When he was nine years old
he shaved his head, named himself Nikkai, and became a Buddhist monk in
the Temple of Shokokuji, which was one of the principal temples of the
Nichi Ren sect in Kioto. From his early life Sansha was very skilful at
the game, and upon giving up his profession as a monk, he obtained
permission to institute a school of Go players, and he then took the
name of Honinbo Sansha. He was on terms of familiar intercourse with
Nobunaga, Hideyoshi and Iyeyasu, often accompanied them on their
travels and campaigns, and was present at many of the battles of that
troublous epoch.

The school of Go which Honinbo opened, however, was merely a private
undertaking. The first State institution in which Go was taught was
founded by Hideyoshi in the period Ten Sho (1573–1591), but it seems to
have had a short existence, and the permanent institution which lasted
until the fall of the Shogunate was founded by the successor of
Hideyoshi, Iyeyasu. Iyeyasu became Shogun in the year 1603, and the
foundation of the Go Academy or “Go In,” as the Japanese call it, must
have occurred soon after he ascended the throne. Honinbo Sansha, who
was still the best Go player in Japan, was named as the head of the
institution. The other most skilful masters were installed as
professors with good salaries. To Honinbo Sansha, the director, was
given 350 tsubo of land (a tsubo is as big as two Japanese mats or
tatami, and is therefore six feet square), and an annual revenue of 200
koku of rice (a koku is a little more than five bushels). Men of the
best intelligence could now dedicate themselves to the education of
students and the further development of the game, freed from the cares
of earning a livelihood. In both respects the institute was eminently
successful. Its graduates were much more skilful than the previous
generation of Go players living in the land. They devoted themselves
entirely to the game, and either found positions as players at the
court of a daimio, or traveled through the country (like the poets and
swordsmen of that period), playing the game and giving instruction in
its mysteries as they found opportunity. If they came to a place which
pleased them, they often let their years of wandering come to an end
and remained there, making their living as teachers of the game.

At the time of the founding of the Academy, besides Honinbo, the
previously mentioned masters, Hayashi, Inouye, and Yasui, were
installed as professors. For some reason, Nakamura, who is mentioned
above as one of the contemporaries of Honinbo, did not appear at the
Academy. Each of the four masters above named founded his school or
method of play independently of the others, and the custom existed that
each teacher adopted his best pupil as a son, and thus had a successor
at his death; so the teachers in the Academy were always named Honinbo,
Inouye, Hayashi, and Yasui. (Lovers of Japanese prints are already
familiar with this continued similarity of names.)

The best players of the Academy had to appear every year before the
Shogun and play for his amusement. This ceremony was called “Go zen
Go,” which means “playing the game in the august presence,” or “O shiro
Go,” “Shiro” meaning “the honorable palace,” and the masters of the
game entered these contests with the same determination that was
displayed by the samurai on the field of battle.

An anecdote has come down to us from the reign of the third Shogun,
Tokugawa Iyemitsu, showing how highly the Go masters regarded their
art. At that time Yasui Sanchi was “Meijin,” which, as we shall see in
a moment, meant the highest rank in the Go world, while Honinbo
Sanyetsu held the rank of “Jo zu,” which was almost as high, but which,
according to the rules, would entitle him to a handicap of one stone
from his expert adversary; and these two men, being the best players,
were selected to play in the Shogun’s presence. Honinbo, feeling
conscious of his skill, disdained to accept the handicap, and met his
adversary on even terms. The game was proceeding in the presence of the
court nobles before the Shogun had appeared, and among the spectators
was Matsudaira Higo no Kami, one of the most powerful noblemen of that
epoch. Yasui Sanchi was a favorite of Matsudaira and as he watched the
play he remarked audibly that Honinbo would surely be defeated. Honinbo
Sanyetsu heard the remark, and pausing in his play, he allowed the
stone which he was about to place on the board to fall back into the
“Go tsubo” or wooden jar that holds the Go stones, gently covered the
“Go tsubo,” and drawing himself up with great dignity, said: “I am
serving the Shogun with the art of Go, and when we Go masters enter a
contest, it is in the same spirit as warriors go upon the field of
battle, staking our life, if necessary, to decide the contest. While we
are doing this we do not allow interference or comments from any one,
no matter how high may be his rank. Although I am not the greatest
master of the game, I hold the degree of ‘Jo zu,’ and, therefore, there
are few players in Japan who are able to appreciate my plans, tactics,
or strategy. Nevertheless, the Prince of Higo has unwarrantedly
prophesied my defeat. I do not understand why he has done this, but if
such a comment were allowed to become a precedent, and onlookers were
permitted to make whatever comments on the game they saw fit, it would
be better that the custom of the ‘O shiro Go’ should cease.” Having
said this, he raised himself from his seat. At this moment the court
officers announced the coming of the Shogun, and the noblemen who had
assembled to see the contest, surprised and confused by the turn
affairs had taken, earnestly persuaded Honinbo to reseat himself and
continue the game. This he obstinately refused to do, and endeavored to
leave the imperial chamber. Prince Matsudaira, taken aback, scarcely
knew what to do. However, he kotowed to Honinbo and, profusely
apologizing, besought the offended master to finish the contest.
Honinbo Sanyetsu was appeased, and resumed his seat at the board, and
both players, aroused by the incident, exerted every effort to achieve
victory. Honinbo Sanyetsu won, whereupon the Prince of Higo was greatly
humiliated. Since then the name of Sanyetsu has always been revered as
one of the greatest of the Honinbo family.

In the degenerate days toward the end of the Tokugawa Dynasty the “Go
zen Go” became a mere farce, and the games were all played through and
studied out beforehand, in order that the ceremony in court might not
last too long. The custom was, however, maintained until the fall of
the Shogunate in 1868.

Honinbo Sansha established at the time of the foundation of the Academy
a method of classifying the players by giving them degrees, which still
exists, although no longer under the authority of the State. When a man
attained to a certain measure of skill in the game he received the
title “Shodan,” or, of the first degree. The still stronger players
were arranged as “Nidan,” “Sandan,” “Yodan,” etc., or of the second,
third, and fourth degrees. The highest degree in the series was
“Kudan,” or the ninth degree. In order to attain the first degree, or
“Shodan,” the candidate must be an excellent player, so good in fact
that he could follow the game as a profession. In other games such a
graduated system of classifying players would be scarcely possible, but
among good Go players it is feasible, because the better player almost
invariably wins, even if he be but slightly superior. If the difference
in skill could not be equalized in some way the game would become
tiresome, as the weaker player would almost always be able to foresee
his defeat. The stronger player, therefore, allows his adversary to
place enough stones on the board as a handicap to make the adversaries
approximately equal.

According to the rules of the Academy, if the difference between the
skill of the players was only one degree, the weaker player would be
allowed the first move. If the difference was two degrees, the weaker
player would be allowed to place a stone on the board, and the stronger
player would have the first move, and so on; in other words, the
difference between each degree might be called half a stone. Thus, a
player of the fourth degree would allow a player of the first degree to
place two stones on the board as a handicap, but would have the first
move. A player of the seventh degree would allow a player of the first
degree three stones, and a player of the ninth degree would allow a
player of the first degree four stones. Four was the highest handicap
allowed among the players holding degrees, but, as we shall see later,
among players of less skill greater handicaps are frequently given.

A player of the seventh degree also received the honorary title “Jo
zu,” or the higher hand. Those of the eighth rank were called “Kan
shu,” or the half-way step, and those of the ninth degree were called
“Mei shu,” the clear, bright hand, or “Mei jin,” literally “celebrated
man.” It is related that this last appellation arose in the time of
Nobunaga, who was a spectator of a game played by Honinbo Sansha with
some contemporary, and who expressed his admiration of the skill of
Honinbo by exclaiming “Mei jin!” which thus became the title applied to
players of the highest skill.

Since the institution of this method of classifying Go players over
three hundred years ago, there have been only nine players who have
attained the ninth degree, and only fourteen players who have attained
the eighth degree. On the other hand, there have been many more of the
seventh, and many more still of each of the lower degrees. In 1880, at
the time Korschelt wrote the article previously referred to, there was
only one player in Japan holding the seventh degree, and that was the
celebrated Murase Shuho. At present there is one player who holds the
ninth degree. His name is Honinbo Shuyei, and he is the only player who
has attained the ninth degree during the period called the “Meiji,” or
since the fall of the Shogunate forty years ago.

This arrangement of the players in degrees is unknown in China and
Korea. On the other hand, it is in use in the Ryukyu or Loochoo
Islands.

The Japanese seem to have regarded the classification in degrees as an
absolute standard of measurement. Nevertheless, it must necessarily
have varied from time to time, and in the course of centuries the
standard must gradually have risen.

Players of high rank who are challenged by the improving players of the
lower grades will instinctively desire to make it more difficult for
the new players to attain the higher degree, because their own fame,
which is their highest possession, depends upon the result of the game;
and assuming that all trial games could be conducted in an impartial
and judicial spirit, nevertheless, all the players would become more
expert from the hard practice, even if their skill in relation to each
other remained the same.

Thus a seventh degree player of to-day would be better in a year
although he still remained in the seventh degree, and this constant
raising of the standard must lead us to suppose that a player of the
seventh degree now is quite equal or perhaps superior to an eighth or
ninth degree player of a hundred or two hundred years ago. As an
illustration of this increase in skill, we only have to compare the
standard set in the Ryukyu Islands. They also established the
classification in degrees soon after the foundation of the Academy in
Japan, and then the two institutions seem to have lost touch. Korschelt
relates that for the first time about the year 1880 a Go player of the
second degree from the Satsuma province visited those Islands and tried
his skill with their best players, and found that he could easily
defeat the players there classified as of the fifth degree.

The position as head of the Academy was much coveted by Go players, but
it was generally held by the Honinbo family. One of the last incidents
in relation to the Academy tells of an attempt on the part of Inouye
Inseki, the eleventh of that line, to obtain the headship of the
Academy when Honinbo Jowa, who was the twelfth Honinbo, retired. Inseki
was afraid he could not obtain the coveted position by a contest, and
therefore strove to obtain it by intrigue from the Shogun’s officer
intrusted with the business of the Academy. When Jowa retired he was
not unaware of the desires of Inseki, but it did not trouble him much,
as he felt confident that the fourteenth Honinbo, whose name was Shuwa,
could successfully defend his title. However, at last matters came to
such a point that Jowa ordered Shuwa to present a petition to the
Shogun requesting that the title be settled by contest, but the
Shogun’s officer, who was in league with Inseki, returned the petition,
whereupon all of the Honinbo house rose and insisted on their rights in
accordance with custom and precedent, and at last their petition was
granted. It was fixed that the title was to be decided by ten games,
and the first game began at the residence of the Shogun’s officer,
Inaba Tango no Kami, on the 29th of November, in the eleventh year of
Tempo (about sixty-six years ago), and it ended the same year on the
13th of December. There was an adjournment of four days, and on one
occasion the contest lasted all night. Therefore in all it took nine
days and one night to finish the game.

It is unnecessary to say that both players put forth all their efforts
in this life and death struggle, and it is said that Inseki’s
excitement was so intense as to cause blood to gush from his mouth, but
he finally lost by four stones, and the other nine games were not
played. Inseki, however, mortified by his defeat, again challenged
Shuwa. This game began on the 16th of May in the thirteenth year of
Tempo, and lasted two days. Inseki again lost by six stones. On
November 17th of the same year a third contest took place between Shuwa
and Inseki in the presence of the Shogun in his palace at Tokio. Inseki
again lost by four stones. In all these contests Inseki as the
challenger had the first move, and he finally became convinced of his
inability to win from the scion of the Honinbo family, and abandoned
his life-long desire, and it is related that thereupon the houses of
Honinbo and Inouye became more friendly than ever.

In the first half of the nineteenth century Go had a period of great
development. This occurred according to the Japanese calendar in the
periods called Bun Kwa (1804–1818), Bun Sei (1818–1829), and Tempo
(1830–1844). The collection of specimen games of that time are to-day
regarded as models, and the methods of play and of opening the game
then in use are still studied, although they have been somewhat
superseded. The best games were played by the Honinbos Dosaku and Jowa
and Yasui Sanchi.

On the fall of the Shogunate in the year 1868 the Go Academy came to an
end, and with it the regulation of the game by the State. A few years
later the daimios were dispossessed, and they did not feel an
obligation as private individuals to retain the services of the Go
players who had been in attendance at their courts. Thereupon ensued a
sad time for the masters of the game, who had theretofore for the most
part lived by the practice of their art, and to make things still
worse, the Japanese people lost their interest in Go. Upon the opening
of the country the people turned with enthusiasm to the foreigners.
Foreign things were more prized than native things, and among the
things of native origin the game of Go was neglected.

About the year 1880, however, a reaction set in; interest in the old
national game was revived, and at the present day it is fostered with
as much zeal as in the olden times.

Most of the higher officials of the government, and also the officers
in the army and navy, are skilled players. The great daily newspapers
of the capitals have a Go department, just as some of our periodicals
have a department devoted to Chess, and the game is very much played at
the hot springs and health resorts, and clubs, and teachers of the art
are found in all of the larger cities. Go has always retained something
of its early aristocratic character, and in fact, it is still regarded
as necessary for a man of refinement to possess a certain skill at the
game.

During the recent Russo-Japanese War the strategy employed by the
Japanese commanders certainly suggested the methods of play used in the
game of Go. Whether this was an accidental resemblance or not I cannot
say. At Liao Yang it seemed as if Marshal Oyama had got three of the
necessary stones advantageously placed, but the Russians escaped before
the fourth could be moved into position. At the final battle of Mukden
the enveloping strategy characteristic of the game was carried out with
still greater success.

At the present time the division into the four schools of Honinbo,
Inouye, Hayashi, and Yasui, no longer exists, and Go players are
divided into the schools of Honinbo and Hoyensha. This latter school
was established about the year 1880 by Murase Shuho, to whom reference
has already been made.

The Honinbo school is the successor of the old Academy, while the new
school has made one or two innovations, one of the most fortunate being
a rule that no game shall last longer than twenty-four hours without
interruption. The Hoyensha school also recognized the degree “Inaka
Shodan,” which means the “first degree in the country,” and is allowed
to a class of players who are regarded as entitled to the first degree
in their native town, but who are generally undeceived when they meet
the recognized “Shodan” players of the metropolis.

While in Japan Go has attained such a high development, largely through
the help of the government, as has been shown, it seems to be decadent
in its motherland of China. The Japanese players assure us that there
is no player in China equal to a Japanese player of the first degree.
In Korea also the game is played, but the skill there attained is also
immensely below the Japanese standard.

Having now given an idea of the importance of the game in the eyes of
the Japanese, and the length of time it has been played, we will
proceed to a description of the board and stones, and then take up the
details of the play.








II

DESCRIPTION OF THE BOARD AND STONES


The board, or “Go Ban” as it is called in Japanese, is a solid block of
wood, about seventeen and a half inches long, sixteen inches broad, and
generally about four or five inches thick. It has four detachable feet
or legs so that as it stands on the floor it is about eight inches
high. The board and feet are always stained yellow.

The best boards in Japan are made of a wood called “Kaya” (Torreya
Nucifera) a species of yew. They are also made of a wood called “Icho”
or Gingko (Salisburia adiantifolia) and of “Hinoki” (Thuya Obtusa) a
kind of cedar. At all events they must be of hard wood, and yet not so
hard as to be unpleasant to the touch when the stone is placed on the
board, and the wood must further have the quality of resonance, because
the Japanese enjoy hearing the sound made by the stone as it is played,
and they always place it on the board with considerable force when
space will permit. The Japanese expression for playing Go, to wit, “Go
wo utsu,” literally means to “strike” Go, referring to the impact of
the stone. In Korea this feature is carried to such an extreme that
wires are stretched beneath the board, so that as a stone is played a
distinct musical sound is produced. The best boards should, of course,
be free from knots, and the grain should run diagonally across them.

In the back of the board there is cut a square depression. The purpose
of this is probably to make the block more resonant, although the old
Japanese stories say that this depression was put there originally to
receive the blood of the vanquished in case the excitement of the game
led to a sanguinary conflict.

The legs of the board are said to be shaped to resemble the fruit of
the plant called “Kuchinashi” or Cape Jessamine (Gardenia floribunda),
the name of which plant by accident also means “without a mouth,” and
this is supposed to suggest to onlookers that they refrain from making
comments on the game (a suggestion which all Chess players will
appreciate).

On the board, parallel with each edge, are nineteen thin, lacquered
black lines. These lines are about four one-hundredths of an inch wide.
It has been seen from the dimensions given that the board is not
exactly square, and the field therefore is a “parallelogram, the sides
of which are sixteen and a half and fifteen inches long respectively,
and the lines in one direction are a little bit farther apart than in
the other. These lines, by their crossing, produce three hundred and
sixty-one points of intersection, including the corners and the points
along the edge of the field.

The stones are placed on these points of intersection, and not in the
spaces as the pieces are in Chess or Checkers. These intersections are
called “Me” or “Moku” in Japanese, which really means “an eye.”
Inasmuch as the word as used in this connection is untranslatable, I
shall hereafter refer to these points of intersection by their Japanese
name.

On the board, as shown in the diagram (Plate 1), are nine little
circles. It is on these circles that the handicap stones when given are
placed. They have no other function in the game, but they are supposed
also to have some sort of symbolical meaning. Chamberlain states that
these spots or “Seimoku” are supposed to represent the chief celestial
bodies, and that the central one is called “Taikyoku”; that is, the
primordial principle of the universe. In the work of Stewart Culin
referred to in the preface it is stated that they correspond to the
nine lights of heaven—the sun, moon and the seven stars of the
constellation “Tau” (Ursa Major). Indeed the whole arrangement of the
board is said to have some symbolical significance, the number of
crosses (exclusive of the central one) representing the three hundred
and sixty degrees of latitude, and the number of white and black stones
corresponding to the number of days of the year; but nowadays the
Japanese do not make much of a point of the astronomical significance
of the board or of the “Seimoku.”

The stones or “Ishi” with which the game is played are three hundred
and sixty-one in number, corresponding to the number of “Me” or points
of intersection on the board. One hundred and eighty of these stones
are white and the remaining one hundred and eighty-one are black. As
the weaker player has the black stones and the first move, obviously
the extra stone must be black. In practice the entire number of stones
is never used, as at the end of the game there are always vacant spaces
on the board. The Japanese generally keep these stones in gracefully
shaped, lacquered boxes or “Go tsubo.”

The white stones are made of a kind of white shell; they are highly
polished, and are exceedingly pleasant to the touch. The best come from
the provinces of Hitachi and Mikawa. The black are made of stone,
generally a kind of slate that comes from the Nachi cataract in Kishiu.
As they are used they become almost jet-black, and they are also
pleasant to the touch, but not so much so as the white. A good set is
quite dear, and cannot be purchased under several yen. The ideograph
formerly used for “Go ishi” indicates that originally they were made of
wood, and not of stone, and the old Chinese ideograph shows that in
that country they were wooden pieces painted black and white. The use
of polished shell for the white stones was first introduced in the
Ashikaga period.

In form the stones are disk-shaped, but not always exactly round, and
are convex on both surfaces, so that they tremble slightly when placed
on the board. They are about three-quarters of an inch in diameter, and
about one-eighth of an inch in thickness. The white stones are
generally a trifle larger than the black ones; for some strange reason
those of both colors are a little bit wider than they should be in
order to fit the board. Korschelt carefully measured the stones which
he used, and found that the black were seventeen-sixteenths of the
distance between the vertical lines on his board, and about
eighteen-nineteenths of the distance between the horizontal lines,
while the white stones were thirteen-twelfths of the distance between
the vertical lines and thirty-six thirty-sevenths of the distance
between the horizontal lines. I found about the same relation of size
in the board and stones which I use.

The result of this is that the stones do not have quite room enough and
lap over each other, and when the board is very full, they push each
other out of place. To make matters still worse the Japanese are not
very careful to put the stones exactly on the points of intersection,
but place them carelessly, so that the board has an irregular
appearance. It is probable that the unsymmetrical shape of the board
and the irregularity of the size of the stones arise from the antipathy
that the Japanese have to exact symmetry. At any rate, it is all
calculated to break up the monotonous appearance which the board would
have if the spaces were exactly square, and the stones were exactly
round and fitted properly in their places.

In Japan the board is placed on the floor, and the players sit on the
floor also, facing each other, as shown in the illustration, and
generally the narrower side of the board is placed so as to face the
players. Since the introduction of tables in Japan Go boards are also
made thinner and without feet, but the game seems to lose some of its
charm when the customs of the old Japan are departed from.

The Japanese always take the stone between the middle and index
fingers, and not between the thumb and index finger as we are likely to
do, and they place it on the board smartly and with great skill, so
that it gives a cheerful sound, as before stated.

For use in this country the board need not be so thick, and need not,
of course, have feet, but if it is attempted to play the game on
cardboard, which has a dead sound as the stones are played, it is
surprising how much the pleasure of the game is diminished. The author
has found that Casino chips are the best substitute for the Japanese
stones.

Originally the board used for the game of Go was not so large, and the
intersecting lines in each direction were only seventeen in number. At
the time of the foundation of the Go Academy this was the size of board
in use. As the game developed the present number of lines became fixed
after trial and comparison with other possible sizes. Korschelt made
certain experiments with the next possible larger size in which the
number of lines in each direction was twenty-one, and it seemed that
the game could still be played, although it made necessary the
intellect of a past master to grasp the resulting combinations. If more
than twenty-one lines are used Korschelt states that the combinations
are beyond the reach of the human mind.

In closing the description of the board it may be interesting to point
out that the game which we call “Go Bang” or “Five in a Row,” is played
on what is really a Japanese Go board, and the word “Go Bang” is merely
another phonetic imitation of the words by which the Japanese designate
their board. I have found, however, that the “Go Bang” boards sold in
the stores in this country are an imitation of the original Japanese
“Go ban,” and have only seventeen lines, and are therefore a little too
small for the game as now played. The game which we call “Go Bang” also
originated in Japan, and is well known and still played there. They
call it “Go Moku Narabe,” which means to arrange five “Me,” the word
“Go” in this case meaning “five,” and “Moku” being the alternative way
of pronouncing the ideograph for eye. “Go Moku Narabe” is often played
by good Go players, generally for relaxation, as it is a vastly simpler
game than Go, and can be finished much more rapidly. It is not,
however, to be despised, as when played by good players there is
considerable chance for analysis, and the play often covers the entire
board.








III

RULES OF PLAY


The players play alternately, and the weaker player has the black
stones and plays first, unless a handicap has been given, in which case
the player using the white stones has the first move. (In the olden
times this was just reversed.) They place the stones on the vacant
points of intersection on the board, or “Me,” and they may place them
wherever they please, with the single exception of the case called
“Ko,” which will be hereafter explained. When the stones are once
played they are never moved again.

The object of the game of Go is to secure territory. Just as the object
of the game of Chess is not to capture pieces, but to checkmate the
adverse King, so in Go the ultimate object is not to capture the
adversary’s stones, but to so arrange matters that at the end of the
game a player’s stones will surround as much vacant space as possible.
At the end of the game, however, before the amount of vacant space is
calculated, the stones that have been taken are used to fill up the
vacant spaces claimed by the adversary; that is to say, the captured
black stones are used to fill up the spaces surrounded by the player
having the white pieces, and vice versa, and the player who has the
greatest amount of territory after the captured stones are used in this
way, is the winner of the game. However, if the players, fearing each
other, merely fence in parts of the board without regard to each
other’s play, a most uninteresting game results, and the Japanese call
this by the contemptuous epithet “Ji dori go,” or “ground taking Go.” I
have noticed that beginners in this country sometimes start to play in
this way, and it is one of the many ways by which the play of a mere
novice may be recognized. The best games arise when the players in
their efforts to secure territory attack each other’s stones or groups
of stones, and we therefore must know how a stone can be taken.

A stone is taken when it is surrounded on four opposite sides as shown
in Plate 2, Diagram I. When it is taken it is removed from the board.
It is not necessary that a stone should also be surrounded diagonally,
which would make eight stones necessary in order to take one; neither
do four stones placed on the adjacent diagonal intersections cause a
stone to be taken: they do not directly attack the stone in the center
at all. Plate 2, Diagram IV, shows this situation.

A stone which is placed on the edge of the board may be surrounded and
captured by three stones, as shown in Plate 2, Diagram II, and if a
stone is placed in the extreme corner of the board, it may be
surrounded and taken by two stones, as shown in Plate 2, Diagram III.

In actual practice it seldom or never happens that a stone or group of
stones is surrounded by the minimum number requisite under the rule,
for in that case the player whose stones were threatened could
generally manage to break through his adversary’s line. It is almost
always necessary to add helping stones to those that are strictly
necessary in completing the capture. Plate 2, Diagram V, shows four
stones which are surrounded with the minimum number of stones. Plate 2,
Diagram VI, shows the same group with a couple of helping stones added,
which would probably be found necessary in actual play.

It follows from this rule that stones which are on the same line
parallel with the edges of the board are connected, and support each
other, Plate 2, Diagram VII, while stones which are on the same
diagonal line are not connected, and do not support each other, Plate
2, Diagram VIII. In order to surround stones which are on the same
line, and therefore connected, it is necessary to surround them all in
order to take them, while stones which are arranged on a diagonal line,
and therefore unconnected, may be taken one at a time. On Plate 2,
Diagram III, if there were a stone placed at S 18, it would not be
connected with the stone in the corner, and would not help it in any
way. On the other hand, as has been said, it is not necessary to place
a white stone on that point in order to complete the capture of the
stone in the corner.

In order to capture a group or chain of stones containing vacant space,
it must be completely surrounded inside and out; for instance, the
black group shown on Plate 2, Diagram IX, while it has no hope of life
if it is White’s play is nevertheless not completely surrounded. In
order to surround it, it is necessary to play on the three vacant
intersections at M 11, N 11, and O 11. The same group of stones is
shown in Diagram X completely surrounded. (It may be said in passing
that White must play at N 11 first or the black stones can defend
themselves; we shall understand this better in a moment.)

In practice it often happens that a stone or group of stones is
regarded as dead before it is completely surrounded, because when the
situation is observed to be hopeless the losing player abandons it, and
addresses his energies to some other part of the board. It is
advantageous for the losing player to abandon such a group as soon as
possible, for, if he continues to add to the group, he loses not only
the territory but the added stones also. If the circumstances are such
that his opponent has to reply to his moves in the hopeless territory,
the loss is not so great, as the opponent is meanwhile filling up
spaces which would otherwise be vacant, and against an inferior player
there is a chance of the adversary making a slip and allowing the
threatened stones to save themselves. If, however, the situation is so
clearly hopeless that the adversary is not replying move for move, then
every stone added to such a group means a loss of two points.

At the end of the game such abandoned groups of stones are removed from
the board just as if they had been completely surrounded and killed,
and it is not necessary for the player having the advantage actually to
surround and kill such a group. It is enough if they obviously can be
killed. The theory on which this rule proceeds is that if the players
play alternately, no advantage would be gained by either side in the
process of actually surrounding such a group, and its completion would
only be a waste of time. But let us suppose that a black group at the
end of the game is found to be hopeless and also completely surrounded
with the exception of one point. The question arises, can the Black
player demand that his adversary play on the vacant space in order to
kill this group, for, if he could, it is obvious he would gain one “Me”
by so doing. The answer is, he cannot so demand, and his adversary is
not bound to play on this point, and the hopeless or abandoned stones
are removed without further play. We might call such groups “dead.”
They may be distinguished from stones that are “taken,” because these
latter are removed at once, whereas “dead” stones are removed only at
the end of the game.

As a corollary to the rule for surrounding and taking stones, it
follows that a group of stones containing two disconnected vacant
intersections or “Me” cannot be taken. This is not a separate rule. It
follows necessarily from the method by which stones are taken.
Nevertheless in practice it is the most important principle in the
game.

In order to understand the rule or principle of the two “Me,” we must
first look at the situation shown in Plate 3, Diagram I. There, if a
black stone is played at F 15, although it is played on an intersection
entirely surrounded by white stones, it nevertheless lives because the
moment it is played it has the effect of killing the entire white
group; that is to say, a stone may be played on an intersection where
it is completely surrounded if as it is played it has the effect of
completely surrounding the adversary’s stones already on the board. If,
on the other hand, we have a situation as shown in Plate 3, Diagram II,
a black stone may indeed be played on one of the vacant intersections,
but when it is so played the white group is not completely surrounded,
because there still remains one space yet to be filled, and the black
stone itself is dead as soon as it touches the board, and hence it
would be impossible to surround this group of white stones unless two
stones were played at once. The white stones, therefore, can never be
surrounded, and form an impregnable position.

This is the principle of the two “Me,” and when a player’s group of
stones is hard pressed, and his adversary is trying to surround them,
if he can so place the stones that two disconnected complete “Me” are
left, they are safe forever. It makes no difference whether the vacant
“Me” are on the edges or in the corners of the board, or how far from
each other they may be.

Plate 3, Diagram VI, shows a group of stones containing two vacant “Me”
on the edge of the board. This group is perfectly safe against attack.
A beginner might ask why the white group shown on Plate 3, Diagram V,
is not safe. The difficulty with that group is, that when Black has
played at S 9, there are no “Me” in it at all as the word is used in
this connection, not even a “Kageme” as shown in Plate 3, Diagram III,
because a “Me,” in order to be available for the purpose of defense,
must be a vacant intersection that is surrounded on four sides, just as
a captured stone must be surrounded, and therefore on the sides of the
board it can be made by three stones, and in the corner of the board by
two stones, but it is absolutely necessary, in addition to the minimum
number of surrounding stones, to have helping stones to guard the
surrounding stones against attack. This brings us to what the Japanese
call “Kageme.”

In actual play there are many groups of stones that at first glance
seem to have two vacant “Me” in them, but which on analysis, will be
found vulnerable to attack. A “Me” that looks somewhat as if it were
complete, but is, nevertheless, destructible is called “Kageme.” “Kage”
means “chipped” or “incomplete.” Plate 3, Diagram III, is an
illustration of this. A beginner might think that the white group was
safe, but Black can kill the upper six white stones by playing at E 3,
and then on the next move can kill the remainder by playing at G 2.
Therefore, E 3 is not a perfect “Me,” but is “Kageme.” G 2 is a perfect
“Me,” but one is not enough to save the group. In this group if the
stone at F 4 or D 2 were white, there would be two perfect “Me,” and
the group would be safe. In a close game beginners often find it
difficult to distinguish between a perfect “Me” and “Kageme.”

Groups of stones which contain vacant spaces, can be lost or saved
according as two disconnected “Me” can or cannot be formed in those
spaces, and the most interesting play in the game occurs along the
sides and especially in the corners of the board in attempting to form
or attempting to prevent the formation of these “Me.” The attacking
player often plays into the vacant space and sacrifices several stones
with the ultimate object of reducing the space to one “Me”; and, on the
other hand, the defending player by selecting a fortunate intersection
may make it impossible for the stones to be killed. There is
opportunity for marvelous ingenuity in the attack and defense of these
positions. A simple example of defense is shown in Plate 3, Diagram IV,
where, if it is White’s turn, and he plays in the corner of the board
at T 19, he can save his stones. If, on the other hand, he plays
anywhere else, the two “Me” can never be formed. The beginner would do
well to work out this situation for himself.

The series of diagrams commencing at Plate 3, Diagram V, show the
theoretical method of reducing vacant spaces by the sacrifice of
stones. This series is taken from Korschelt, and the position as it
arose in actual play is shown on Plate 10, depicting a complete game.
In Plate 3, Diagram V, the white group is shown externally surrounded,
and the black stone has just been played at S 9, rendering the group
hopeless. The same group is shown on the opposite side of the board at
Plate 4, Diagram I, but Black has added three more stones and could
kill the white group on the next move. Therefore, White plays at A 12,
and the situation shown in Plate 4, Diagram II, arises, where the same
group is shown on the lower edge of the board. Now, if it were White’s
move, he could save his group by playing at J 2, and the situation
which would then arise is shown on Plate 4, Diagram III, where White
has three perfect “Me,” one more than enough. However, it is not
White’s move, and Black plays on the coveted intersection, and then
adds two more stones until the situation shown in Plate 4, Diagram IV,
arises. Then White must again play at S 8 in order to save his stones
from immediate capture, and the situation shown at Plate 5, Diagram I,
comes about. Black again plays at J 18, adds one more stone, and we
have the situation shown in Plate 5, Diagram II, where it is obvious
that White must play at C 11 in order to save his group from immediate
capture, thus leaving only two vacant spaces. It is unnecessary to
continue the analysis further, but at the risk of explaining what is
apparent, it might be pointed out that Black would play on one of these
vacant spaces, and if White killed the stone (which it would not pay
White to do) Black would play again on the space thus made vacant, and
completely surround and kill the entire white group.

A group with five vacant “Me,” as shown in the preceding diagrams, is a
situation well known to the Japanese, so much so that they have a
special phrase or saying that applies to it, to wit, “Go moku naka de
wa ju san te,” which means that it takes thirteen turns to reduce a
group having five such “Me” in the center.

As we have previously seen, in actual play this white group would be
regarded as “dead” as distinguished from “taken,” and this series of
moves would not be played out. White obviously would not play in the
space, and he could not demand that Black play therein in order to
complete the actual surrounding of the stones, and the only purpose of
giving this series of diagrams is to show theoretically how the white
stones can be killed. However, the killing of these stones would be
necessary if the surrounding black line were in turn attacked
(“Semeai”), in which case it might be a race to see whether the
internal white stones could be completely surrounded and killed before
the external white group could get in complete contact with the black
line.

Stones which are sacrificed in order to kill a larger group are called
“Sute ishi” by the Japanese, from “Suteru,” meaning “to cast or throw
away,” and “Ishi,” a “stone.”

It may be noted that if a group contains four connected vacant
intersections in a line it is safe, because if the adversary attempts
to reduce it, two disconnected “Me” can be formed in the space by
simply playing a stone adjacent to the adversary’s stone, as shown in
Plate 5, Diagram III, where, if Black plays for instance at K 11, White
replies at L 11, and secures the two “Me.” Even if these four connected
vacant intersections are not in a straight line, they are nevertheless
sufficient for the purpose, provided the fourth “Me” is connected at
the end of the three, and the Japanese express this by their saying
“Magari shimoku wa me,” or four “Me” turning a corner. Neither does it
make any difference whether the four connected “Me” are in the center
of the board or along the edge. On Plate 5, Diagrams IV and V, are
examples of “Magari shimoku wa me,” and they both are safe. It is
interesting, however, to compare these situations with that shown at
Plate 4, Diagram II, where the fourth intersection is not connected at
the end of the line, and which group Black can kill if it is his move,
as we already have seen.

If, however, such a group contains only three connected vacant
intersections, and it is the adversary’s move, it can be killed,
because the adversary by playing on the middle intersection can prevent
the formation of two disconnected “Me.” We saw a group of this kind on
Plate 2, Diagram IX, which can be killed by playing at N 11. Obviously,
if it is Black’s move in this case, the group can be saved by playing
at N 11; obviously, also, if White, being a mere novice, plays
elsewhere than at N 11, Black saves the stones by playing there and
killing the white stone. Plate 5, Diagram VI, shows another group
containing only three vacant intersections. These can be killed if it
is Black’s move by playing at A 1. On the other hand, if it is White’s
move, he can save them by playing on the same point.

Of course, if a group of stones contains a large number of vacant
intersections, it is perfectly safe unless the vacant space is so large
that the adversary can have a chance of forming an entire new living
group of stones therein.

We now come to the one exception to the rule that the players may place
their stones at will on any vacant intersection on the board. This rule
is called the rule of “Ko,” and is shown on Plate 6, Diagram I.
Assuming that it is White’s turn to play, he can play at D 17 and take
the black stone at C 17 which is already surrounded on three sides, and
the position shown in Plate 6, Diagram II, would then arise. It is now
White’s turn to play, and if he plays at C 13, the white stone which
has just been put down will be likewise surrounded and could be at once
taken from the board. Black, however, is not permitted to do this
immediately, but must first play somewhere else, and this gives White
the choice of filling up this space (C 13) and defending his stone, or
of following his adversary to some other portion of the board. The
reason for this rule in regard to “Ko” is very clear. If the players
were permitted to take and retake the stones as shown in the diagram,
the series of moves would be endless, and the game could never be
finished. It is something like perpetual check in Chess, but the
Japanese, in place of calling the game a draw, compel the second player
to move elsewhere and thus allow the game to continue. In an actual
game when a player is prevented from retaking a stone by the rule of
“Ko,” he always tries to play in some other portion of the board where
he threatens a larger group of stones than is involved in the situation
where “Ko” occurs, and thus often he can compel his adversary to follow
him to this other part of the field, and then return to retake in “Ko.”
His adversary then will play in some part of the field, if possible,
where another group can be threatened, and so on. Sometimes in a hotly
contested game the battle will rage around a place where “Ko” occurs
and the space will be taken and retaken several times.

Korschelt states that the ideograph for “Ko” means “talent” or
“skilfulness,” in which he is very likely wrong, as it is more
accurately translated by our word “threat”; but be this as it may, it
is certainly true that the rule in regard to “Ko” gives opportunity for
a great display of skill, and as the better players take advantage of
this rule with much greater ingenuity, it is a good idea for the weaker
player as far as possible to avoid situations where its application
arises.

There is a situation which sometimes arises and which might be mistaken
for “Ko.” It is where a player takes more than one stone and the
attacking stone is threatened on three sides, or where only one stone
is taken, but the adversary in replying can take not only the last
stone played, but others also. In these cases the opponent can retake
immediately, because it will at once be seen that an endless exchange
of moves (which makes necessary the rule of “Ko”) would not occur. A
situation of this kind is shown on Plate 6, Diagrams III, IV, and V,
where White by playing at C 8 (Diagram III) takes the three black
stones, producing the situation shown in Diagram IV, and Black is
permitted immediately to retake the white stone, producing the state of
affairs shown in Diagram V. The Japanese call such a situation “Ute
kaeshi,” which means “returning a blow.” It forms no exception to the
ordinary rules of the game, and only needs to be pointed out because a
beginner might think that the rule of “Ko” applied to it.

We will now take up the situation called “Seki.” “Seki” means a
“barrier” or “impasse”—it is a different word from the “Seki” in the
phrase “Jo seki.” “Seki” also is somewhat analogous to perpetual check.
It arises when a vacant space is surrounded partly by white and partly
by black stones in such a way that, if either player places a stone
therein, his adversary can thereupon capture the entire group. Under
these circumstances, of course, neither player desires to place a stone
on that portion of the board, and the rules of the game do not compel
him to do so. That portion of the board is regarded as neutral
territory, and at the end of the game the vacant “Me” are not counted
in favor of either player. Plate 6, Diagram VI, gives an illustration
of “Seki,” where it will be seen that if Black plays at either S 16 or
T 16 White can kill the black stones in the corner by playing on the
other point, and if White plays on either point Black can kill the
white stones by filling the remaining vacancy. Directly below, on
Diagram VII, is shown the same group, but the corner black stone has
been taken out. The position is now no longer “Seki,” but is called by
the Japanese “Me ari me nashi,” or literally “having ‘Me,’ not having
‘Me.’” Here the white stones are dead, because if Black plays, for
instance, at T 4 White cannot kill the black stones by playing at S 4,
for the reason that the vacant “Me” at T 1 still remains. The beginner
might confuse “Seki” with “Me ari me nashi,” and while a good player
has no trouble in recognizing the difference when the situation arises,
it takes considerable foresight sometimes so to play as to produce one
situation or the other.

Plate 6, Diagram VIII, shows another group which might be mistaken for
“Seki,” but here, if White plays at J 19, the black stones can be
killed, further proceedings being somewhat similar to those we saw in
the illustration of “Go moku naka de wa ju san te.” Plate 7 shows a
large group of stones from which inevitably “Seki” will result. It
would be well for the student to work this out for himself. “Seki” very
seldom or never occurs in games between good players, and it rarely
occurs in any game.

It is a rule of the game to give warning when a stone or group of
stones is about to be completely surrounded. For this purpose the
Japanese use the word “Atari” (from “ataru,” to touch lightly), which
corresponds quite closely to the expression “gardez” in Chess. If this
warning were omitted, the player whose stones were about to be taken
should have the right to take his last move over and save the imperiled
position if he could. This rule is not so strictly observed as
formerly; it belongs more to the etiquette of the old Japan.

The game comes to an end when the frontiers of the opposing groups are
in contact. This does not mean that the board is entirely covered, for
the obvious reason that the space inside the groups or chains of stones
is purposely left vacant, for that is the only part of the board which
counts; but so long as there is any vacant space lying between the
opposing groups that must be disposed of in some way, and when it is so
disposed of it will be found that the white and black groups are in
complete contact.

Just at the end of the game there will be found isolated vacant
intersections or “Me” on the frontier lines, and it does not make any
difference which player fills these up. They are called by the Japanese
“Dame,” which means “useless.” (The word “Dame” is likely to be
confusing when it is first heard, because the beginner jumps to the
conclusion that it is some new kind of a “Me.” This arises from a
coincidence only. Anything that is useless or profitless is called
“Dame” in Japanese, but etymologically the word really means “horse’s
eye,” as the Japanese, not being admirers of the vacant stare of that
noble animal, have used this word as a synonym for all that is useless.
Therefore the syllable “Me” does mean an eye, and is the same word that
is used to designate the intersections, but its recurrence in this
connection is merely an accident.)

It is difficult for the beginner at first to understand why the filling
of these “Dame” results in no advantage to either player, and beginners
often fill up such spaces even before the end of the game, feeling that
they are gaining ground slowly but surely; and the Japanese have a
saying, “Heta go ni dame nashi,” which means that there are no “Dame”
in beginners’ Go, as beginners do not recognize their uselessness. On
the other hand, a necessary move will sometimes look like “Dame.” The
moves that are likely to be so confused are the final connecting moves
or “Tsugu,” where a potential connection has been made early in the
game, but which need to be filled up to complete the chain. In the
Illustrative Game, Number I, the “Dame” are all given, but a little
practice is necessary before they can always be recognized.

When the “Dame” have been filled, and the dead stones have been removed
from the board, there is no reason why the players should not at once
proceed to counting up which of them has the greatest amount of vacant
space, less, of course, the number of stones they have lost, and thus
determine who is the victor. As a matter of practice, however, the
Japanese do not do this immediately, but, purely for the purpose of
facilitating the count, the player having the white pieces would fill
up his adversary’s territory with the black stones he had captured as
far as they would go, and the player having the black stones would fill
up his adversary’s territory with the white stones that he had
captured; and thereupon the entire board is reconstructed, so that the
vacant spaces come into rows of fives and tens, so that they are easier
to count. This has really nothing to do with the game, and it is merely
a device to make the counting of the spaces easier, but it seems like a
mysterious process to a novice, and adds not a little to the general
mystery with which the end of the game seems to be surrounded when an
Occidental sees it played for the first time. This process of
arrangement is called “Me wo tsukuru.” It may be added that if any part
of the board contains the situation called “Seki,” that portion is left
alone, and is not reconstructed like the rest of the board.

Plate 8 shows a completed game in which the “Dame” have all been
filled, but the dead stones have not yet been removed from the board.
Let us first see which of the stones are dead. It is easy to see that
the white stone at N 11 is hopeless, as it is cut off in every
direction. The same is true of the white stone at B 18. It is not so
easy to see that the black stones at L and M 18, N, O, P, Q and R 17, N
16, and M and N 15 are dead, but against a good player they would have
no hope of forming the necessary two “Me,” and they are therefore
conceded to be dead; but a good player could probably manage to defend
them against a novice. It is still more difficult to see why the
irregular white group of eighteen stones on the left-hand side of the
board has been abandoned, but there also White has no chance of making
the necessary two “Me.” At the risk of repetition I will again point
out that these groups of dead stones can be taken from the board
without further play.

Plate 9 shows the same game after the dead stones have been removed and
used to fill up the respective territories, and after the board has
been reconstructed in accordance with the Japanese method, and it will
be seen that in this case Black has won by one stone. This result can
be arrived at equally well by counting up the spaces on Plate 8, but
they are easier to count on Plate 9, after the “Me wo tsukuru” has been
done.

Plate 10 shows another completed game. This plate is from Korschelt,
and is interesting because it contains an instructive error. The game
is supposed to be completed, and the black stone at C 18 is said to be
dead. This is not true, because Black by playing at C 17 could not only
save his stone, but kill the four white stones at the left-hand side.
Therefore, before this game is completed, White must play at C 17 to
defend himself. This is called “Tsugu.” On the left-hand side of the
board is shown a white group which is dead, and the method of reduction
of which we have already studied in detail. On the right side of the
board are a few scattering black stones which are dead, because they
have no chance of forming a group with the necessary two “Me.” The
question may be asked whether it is necessary for White to play at C 1
or E 1 in order to complete the connection of the group in the corner,
but he is not obliged so to do unless Black chooses to play at B 1 or F
1, which, of course, Black would not do.

On Plate 11, this game also is shown as reconstructed for counting, and
it will be seen that White has won by two stones. Really this is an
error of one stone, as White should have played at C 17, as we have
previously pointed out.

Sometimes at the end of the game players of moderate skill may differ
as to whether there is anything left to be done, and when one thinks
there is no longer any advantage to be gained by either side, he says,
“Mo arimasen, aru naraba o yuki nasai,” that is to say, “I think there
is nothing more to be done; if you think you can gain anything, you may
play,” and sometimes he will allow his adversary to play two or three
times in succession, reserving the right to step in if he thinks there
is a chance of his adversary reviving a group that is apparently dead.

No part of the rules of the game has been more difficult for me to
understand than the methods employed at the end, and especially the
rule in regard to the removal of dead stones without actually
surrounding them, but I trust in the foregoing examples I have made
this rule sufficiently clear. Moreover, it is not always easy to tell
whether stones are dead or alive. There is a little poem or “Hokku” in
Japanese, which runs as follows:


                   “Iki shini wo
                    Shiranu nonki no
                    Go uchi kana,”


which might be translated as “Oh! what kind of a Go player is he who
does not know whether his stones are alive or dead!” But while the
Japanese author of this “Hokku” may have regarded it as a simple thing,
the Occidental student of the game would not be likely to share his
views. An instance of this is shown by the possibilities of the
supposedly dead black stone on Plate 10, and I think it would be fairer
to state that the skill of a good Go player is most clearly shown by
his ability to recognize immediately whether a group is dead or can be
saved; the study of our chapter on Problems will give further
illustrations of the difficulty and nicety of such decisions.

We now come to the question of handicaps. Handicaps are given by the
stronger player allowing the weaker player to place a certain number of
stones on the board before the game begins, and we have seen in the
chapter on the Description of the Board that these stones are placed on
the nine dotted intersections. If one stone is given, it is usual to
place it in the upper right-hand corner. If a second stone is given, it
is placed in the lower left-hand corner. If a third stone is given, it
is placed in the lower right-hand corner. The fourth is placed in the
upper left-hand corner. The fifth is placed at the center or “Ten gen.”
When six are given, the center one is removed, and the fifth and sixth
are placed at the left and right-hand edges of the board on line 10. If
seven are given, these stones remain, and the seventh stone is placed
in the center. If eight are given, the center stone is again removed,
and the seventh and eighth stones are placed on the “Seimoku” on line
K. If the ninth is given, it is again placed in the center of the
board.

Between players of reasonable skill more than nine stones are never
given, but when the disparity between the players is too great, four
other stones are sometimes given. They are placed just outside the
corner “Seimoku,” as shown on the diagram (Plate 12), and these extra
stones are called “Furin” handicaps. “Furin” means “a small bell,” as
these stones suggest to the Japanese the bells which hang from the
eaves at the corners of a Japanese temple. When the disparity between
the players is very great indeed, sometimes four more stones are given,
and when given they are placed on the diagonal halfway between the
corner “Seimoku” and the center. These four stones are called “Naka
yotsu,” or “the four middle stones,” but such a handicap could only be
given to the merest novice.

We have now completed a survey of all the actual rules of the game, and
it may be well to summarize them in order that their real simplicity
may be clearly seen; briefly, they are as follows:

1. The object of the game is to obtain vacant territory.

2. The stones are placed on the intersections and on any vacant
intersection the player chooses (except in the case of “Ko”). After
they are played they are not moved again.

3. (a) One or more stones which are compactly surrounded by the stones
of the other side are said to be taken and are at once removed from the
board.

(b) Stones which, while not actually surrounded can inevitably be
surrounded, are dead, and can be taken from the board at the end of the
game without further play.

(c) Taken or dead stones are used to fill up the adversary’s territory.

4. The game is at an end when the opposing groups of stones are in
absolute contact (the case of “Seki” being the single exception).

It is not possible to imagine a game with simpler rules, or the
elements of which are easier to acquire.

We will now turn our attention to a few considerations as to the best
methods of play, and of certain moves and formations which occur in
every game, and also to the names which in Japanese are used to
designate these things.








IV

GENERAL METHODS OF PLAY AND TERMINOLOGY OF THE GAME


As will be shown more in detail in the chapter on Openings or “Joseki,”
the game is commenced by playing in the corners of the board, and
generally on one of the squares adjacent to the handicap point. The
reason for this is that the corners of the board are natural
fortresses, and can be more readily defended against attack. It is also
easier to form territory in the corners of the board. Next to the
corners of the board the sides of the board are easiest to defend, and
territory is more easily formed along the sides than in the center, and
in an ordinary game the play generally proceeds from the corners and
edges to the center. The importance which the Japanese attach to the
corners is shown by their saying “Yo sumi torarete go wo utsu na,” or,
“if the four corners are taken, cease playing.” Against a good player
it is next to impossible to form territory in the center of the board,
unless it is based on one of the sides or corners.

There is, however, an old rule of etiquette which is not consistent
with this theory of the opening; it used to be regarded as exceedingly
impolite and insulting to play the first stone on the handicap point in
the center of the board, called “Ten gen.” It has been explained to me
that the reason for this rule is that such a move was supposed to
assure the victory to the first player, and it is related that when on
one occasion Murase Shuho had defeated a rival many times in
succession, the latter, becoming desperate, apologized for his rudeness
and placed his stone on this spot, and Murase, nevertheless, succeeded
in winning the game, which was regarded as evidence of his great skill.
It has, however, been shown by Honinbo Dosaku that this move gives the
first player no decisive advantage, and I have been also told by some
Japanese that the reason that this move is regarded as impolite is
because it is a wasted move, and implies a disrespect for the
adversary’s skill, and from what experience I have had in the game I
think the latter explanation is more plausible. At all events, such a
move is most unusual and can only be utilized by a player of the
highest skill.

When good players commence the game, from the first they have in mind
the entire board, and they generally play a stone in each of the four
corners and one or two around the edges of the board, sketching out, as
it were, the territory which they ultimately hope to obtain. They do
not at once attack each other’s stones, and it is not until the game is
well advanced that anything like a hand to hand conflict occurs.
Beginners are likely to engage at once in a close conflict. Their minds
seem to be occupied with an intense desire to surround and capture the
first stones the adversary places on the board, and often their
opposing groups of stones, starting in one corner, will spread out in a
struggling mass from that point all over the board. There is no surer
indication of the play of a novice than this. It is just as if a battle
were to commence without the guidance of a commanding officer, by
indiscriminate fisticuffs among the common soldiers. Of the other
extreme, or “Ji dori Go,” we have already spoken. Another way in which
the play of experts may be recognized is that all the stones of a good
player are likely to be connected in one or at most two groups, while
poorer players find their stones divided up into small groups each of
which has to struggle to form the necessary two “Me” in order to insure
survival.

Assuming that we have advanced far enough to avoid premature encounters
or “Ji dori Go,” and are placing our stones in advantageous positions,
decently and in order, the question arises, how many spaces can be
safely skipped from stone to stone in advancing our frontiers; that is
to say, how far can stones be separated and yet be potentially
connected, and therefore safe against attack? The answer is, that two
spaces can safely be left if there are no adversary’s stones in the
immediate vicinity. To demonstrate this, let us suppose that Black has
stones at R 13 and R 16, and White tries to cut them off from each
other. White’s best line of attack would be as follows:


                             WHITE   BLACK
                             R 14    S 14
                             R 15    S 15
                             Q 16    R 17
                             Q 13    R 12
                             Q 12


and Black has made good his connection, or Black at his fourth move
could play at Q 14, then


                             W      B
                             Q 15   R 12
                             P 14   takes.


There are other continuations, but they are still worse for White. If,
however, the adversary’s stones are already posted on the line of
advance sometimes it is only safe to skip one point, and of course in
close positions the stones must be played so that they are actually
connected. The Japanese call this skipping of “Me” by the terms “Ikken
tobi,” “Nikken tobi,” “Sangen tobi,” etc., which literally means “to
fly one, two, or three spaces.” Although this is plain enough, these
relations are nevertheless shown on Plate 13, Diagrams I, II, and III.
When stones of opposite colors on the same line are separated by vacant
space in a similar way (Diagram IV), then the terms “Ikken kakari,”
“Nikken kakari,” etc., are used. “Kakari” really means “to hang” or “to
be related,” but as used in this sense it might be translated “to
attack.”

Sometimes the stones are placed in relation to each other like the
Knight’s move in Chess. The Knight in Japanese is called “Keima,” or
“the honorable horse,” and if the stones are of the same color the
relation is called “Keima” or “Kogeima,” “Ko” being the diminutive. If
the stones are of opposite colors, then the phrase “Keima” or “Kogeima
kakari” is used as in the previous case. The Japanese also designate a
relation similar to the Knight’s move, but farther apart, by special
words; thus, if the stones are one space farther apart, it is called
“Ogeima,” or “the Great Knight’s move,” and if the stone is advanced
one step still farther, it is called “Daidaigeima,” or “the Great Great
Knight’s move.” On Plate 13, Diagrams V, VI, and VII, are shown
“Kogeima,” “Ogeima,” and “Daidaigeima.”

The next question that will trouble the beginner is where to place his
stones when his adversary is advancing into his territory, and
beginners are likely to play their stones directly in contact with the
advancing forces. This merely results in their being engulfed by the
attacking line, and the stones and territory are both lost. If you wish
to stop your adversary’s advance, play your stones a space or two apart
from his, so that you have a chance to strengthen your line before his
attack is upon you.

The next thing we will speak of is what the Japanese call the “Sente.”
This word means literally “the leading hand,” but is best translated by
our words “having the offensive.” It corresponds quite closely to the
word “attack,” as it is used in Chess, but in describing a game of Go
it is better to reserve the word “attack” for a stronger demonstration
than is indicated by the word “Sente.” The “Sente” merely means that
the player having it can compel his adversary to answer his moves or
else sustain worse damage, and sometimes one player will have the
“Sente” in one portion of the board, and his adversary may disregard
the attack and by playing in some other quarter take the “Sente” there.
Sometimes the defending player by his ingenious moves may turn the
tables on his adversary and wrest the “Sente” from him. At all events,
holding the “Sente” is an advantage, and the annotations on
illustrative games abound with references to it, and conservative
authors on the game advise abandoning a stone or two for the purpose of
taking the “Sente.”

Sometimes a player has three stones surrounding a vacant space, as
shown in Plate 13, Diagram VIII, and the question arises how to attack
this group. This is done by playing on the fourth intersection. The
Japanese call this “Nozoku,” or “peeping into,” and when a stone is
played in this way it generally forces the adversary to fill up that
“Me.” It may be mentioned here also that when your adversary is trying
to form “Me” in a disputed territory, the way to circumvent him is to
play your stones on one of the four points he will obviously need to
complete his “Me,” and sometimes this is done before he has three of
the necessary stones on the board. The term “Nozoku” is also applied to
any stone which is played as a preliminary move in cutting the
connection between two of the adversary’s stones or groups of stones.

Sometimes a situation occurs as shown in Plate 13, Diagram IX. Here it
is supposed to be White’s move, and he must, of course, play at K 8,
whereupon Black would play at K 7 (“Osaeru”), and White would have to
play at L 8 (“Nobiru”), and so on until, if these moves were persisted
in, the formation would stretch in a zigzag line to the edge of the
board. This situation is called “Shicho,” which really means “a running
attack.” It results in the capture of the white stones when the edge of
the board is reached, unless they happen to find a comrade posted on
the line of retreat, for instance, at P 4, in which case they can be
saved. Of course, between good players “Shicho” is never played out to
the end, for they can at once see whether or not the stones will live,
and often a stone placed seemingly at random in a distant part of the
board is played partly with the object of supporting a retreating line
should “Shicho” occur.

Plate 13, Diagram X, shows a situation that often arises, in which the
White player, by putting his stone at M 1 on the edge of the board, can
join his two groups of stones. This is so because if Black plays at L 1
or N 1, White can immediately kill the stone. This joining on the edge
of the board is called by the special term “Watari,” which means “to
cross over,” Sometimes we find the word “Watari” used when the
connection between two groups is made in a similar way, although not at
the extreme edge of the board.

A much more frequent situation is shown at Plate 13, Diagram XI. It is
not worthy of special notice except because a special word is applied
to it. If Black plays at S 1, it is called “Haneru,” which really means
the flourish which is made in finishing an ideograph.

We will now take up a few of the other words that are used by the
Japanese as they play the game. By far the most frequent of these are
“Tsugu,” “Kiru,” “Nobiru,” and “Osaeru.” “Tsugu” means “to connect,”
and when two stones are adjacent but on the diagonal, as shown in Plate
13, Diagram XII, it is necessary to connect them if an attack is
threatened. This may be done by playing on either side; that is to say,
at Q 17 or R 16. If, on the other hand, Black should play on both these
points, the white stones would be forever separated, and this cutting
off is called “Kiru,” although, as a rule, when such a situation is
worthy of comment, one of the intersections has already been filled by
the attacking player. Plate 13, Diagram XIII, illustrates “Kiru,”
where, if a black stone is played at Q 12, the white stones are
separated. “Kiru” means “to cut,” and is recognizable as one of the
component parts of that much abused and mispronounced word “Harakiri.”
“Nobiru” means “to extend,” and when there is a line of stones it means
the adding of another one at the end, not skipping a space as in the
case of “Ikken tobi,” but extending with the stones absolutely
connected. In Plate 13, Diagram XIV, if Black plays at Q 9 it would be
called “Nobiru.” “Osaeru” means “to press down,” and this is what we do
when we desire to prevent our adversary from extending his line, as
seen in the preceding diagram. It is done by playing directly at the
end of the adversary’s line, as shown in Diagram XV, where Black is
supposed to play at Q 6. Here White must play on one side of the black
stone, but it must be pointed out that unless there is support in the
neighborhood for the stone used in “Osaeru,” the stone thus played runs
the risk of capture. In Diagram IX, explaining “Shicho,” we also had an
illustration of “Nobiru” and “Osaeru.”

If a stone is played on the intersection diagonally adjacent to another
stone, it is called “Kosumu,” but this word is not nearly so much used
as the other four. Sometimes, also, when it is necessary to connect two
groups of stones instead of placing the stone so as actually to connect
them, as in the case of “Tsugu,” the stone is played so as to
effectively guard the point of connection and thus prevent the
adversary’s stone from separating the two groups. This play is called
“Kake tsugu,” or “a hanging connection”; e.g., in Diagram XIII, if a
white stone were played at Q 11 it would be an instance of “Kake tsugu”
and would have prevented the black stone from cutting off the White
connection at Q 12, for, if the black stone were played there after a
white stone had been placed at Q 11, White could capture it on the next
move.

Passing from these words which describe the commonest moves in the
game, we will mention the expression “Te okure”—literally “a slow hand”
or “a slow move,” which means an unnecessary or wasted move. Many of
the moves of a beginner are of this character, especially when he has a
territory pretty well fenced in and cannot make up his mind whether or
not it is necessary to strengthen the group before proceeding to
another field of battle. In annotating the best games, also, it is used
to mean a move that is not the best possible move, and we frequently
hear it used by Japanese in criticising the play.

“Semeai” is another word with which we must be familiar. It means
“mutually attacking,” from “Semeru,” “to attack,” and “Au,” “to
encounter,” that is to say, if the White player attacks a group of
black stones, the Black player answers by endeavoring to surround the
surrounding stones, and so on. In our Illustrative Game, Number I, the
play in the upper right-hand corner of the board is an example of
“Semeai.” It is in positions of this kind that the condition of affairs
called “Seki” often comes about.

Plate 13, Diagram XVI, shows a position which is illustrated only
because a special name is applied to it. The Japanese call such a
relation of stones “Cho tsugai,” literally, “the hinge of a door.”

The last expression which we will give is “Naka oshi gatchi,” which is
the term applied to a victory by a large margin in the early part of
the game. These Japanese words mean “to conquer by pushing the center.”
Beginners are generally desirous of achieving a victory in this way,
and are not content to allow their adversary any portion of the board.
It is one of the first things to be remembered, that, no matter how
skilful a player may be, his adversary will always be able to acquire
some territory, and one of the maxims of the game is not to attempt to
achieve too great a victory.

Before proceeding with the technical chapters on the Illustrative
Games, Openings, etc., it may be well to say a word in regard to the
method adopted for keeping a record of the game. The Japanese do this
by simply showing a picture of the finished game, on which each stone
is numbered as it was played. If a stone is taken and another stone is
put in its place, an annotation is made over the diagram of the board
with a reference to that intersection, stating that such a stone has
been taken in “Ko.” Such a method with the necessary marginal
annotation is good enough, but it is very hard to follow, as there is
no means of telling where any stone is without searching all over the
board for it; and while the Japanese are very clever at this,
Occidental students of the game do not find it so easy. Therefore, I
have adopted the method suggested by Korschelt, which in turn is
founded on the custom of Chess annotation in use all over the world.
The lines at the bottom of the board are lettered from A to T, the
letter I being omitted, and at the sides of the board they are numbered
up from 1 to 19. Thus it is always easy to locate any given stone. In
the last few years the Japanese have commenced to adopt an analogous
method of notation.








V

ILLUSTRATIVE GAMES


I

Plate 14


White.—Iwasa Kei, fifth degree.

Black.—Madame Tsutsuki Yoneko, second degree.

Black has a handicap of two stones.

Played about October, 1906. The record is from the “Tokio Nichi Nichi.”
Played about October, 1906. The record is from the “Tokio Nichi Nichi.”
This game is selected because it is very thoroughly played out. The
notes are intended for beginners, and much is stated which is obvious
to a player of any skill; supplementing the explanations made in the
preceding chapter the Japanese names of the various moves are given.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      C 15. A rather unusual       2.      R 4. Called “Komoku,” the
        move called “Moku                    most usual and most
        hadzushi.” As will be seen           conservative method of
        in the chapter on                    commencing the corner
        “Joseki,” it is the least            play.
        conservative of the three
        usual openings.
3.      P 3.                         4.      Q 5. Intended to attack
                                             No. 3, and also it
                                             commences to make
                                             territory on the right
                                             side of the board.
5.      D 17. This move secures      6.      O 4. Continues the attack
        this corner for White.               on No. 3.
7.      N 3. (“Ikken tobi”) M 3      8.      R 10. Black tries to make
        would be too far.                    territory on the right
                                             side.
9.      F 3. (“Kogeima.”) This is    10.     C 7. (“Ogeima.”) This is
        the usual move.                      the usual reply. See the
                                             chapter on “Joseki.”
11.     C 3.                         12.     D 3. Cutting off No. 11.
13.     C 4. (“Nobiru.”) Giving      14.     D 5.
        aid to No. 11.
15.     C 5.                         16.     C 6. (“Osaeru.”) Black
                                             could not do this before.
17.     D 2.                         18.     E 2.
19.     C 2. (“Tsugu.”) This move    20.     E 3. (“Tsugu.”) White now
        is necessary.                        has the corner, but Black
                                             has possibilities of
                                             expansion.
21.     F 4. Supporting No. 9.       22.     E 6. Connecting and at the
        “Ikken tobi” would be                same time attacking White.
        dangerous.
23.     G 6.                         24.     C 11. Making territory on
                                             the left side of the
                                             board.
25.     K 17. Aiming to make         26.     L 3. Precipitate.
        territory at the top of
        the board.                           Comment by Honinbo Shuye:

                                             “Black’s twenty-sixth move
                                             is premature, and it has
                                             the effect of
                                             precipitating the contest
                                             too early in the game. The
                                             territory around that
                                             point is dangerous ground
                                             for Black. N 17 would have
                                             been better.”
27.     N 4. This is necessary to    28.     L 5. Leading out toward
        lead out the stone at N 3.           the center. (“Ikken taka
        “Ikken tobi” would be                tobi.”)
        dangerous.
                                             Comment by Honinbo Shuye:

                                             “Black should have played
                                             at H 4. White would then
                                             play at F 2, and Black
                                             would reply at E 1.”
29.     O 5.                         30.     H 3. Taking territory.

                                             Comment by Honinbo Shuye:

                                             “Black should still play
                                             at H 4.”
31.     F 2. Preventing the          32.     F 1. (“Haneru.”)
        connection of the two
        Black groups.
33.     G 1.                         34.     E 1. (“Tsugu.”) This
                                             series of moves is
                                             necessary and often occurs
                                             in the game.
35.     H 2. Protecting the          36.     J 3. Black must connect,
        connection at G 2.                   otherwise the stone at H 3
                                             is lost.
37.     F 6.                         38.     F 8. Aiming to make
                                             territory.

                                             Comment by Honinbo Shuye:

                                             “This move does not hit
                                             the spot. It should have
                                             been played at L 7.”
39.     G 8. This move prevents      40.     G 9.
        White from being shut in.
41.     H 8. (“Nobiru.”)             42.     F 7. Black completes his
                                             frontier.
43.     G 7. Necessary to connect.   44.     F 10. This secures the
                                             connection at F 9, and at
                                             the same time extends.
45.     K 4. White threatens to      46.     L 4.
        break through in two
        places.
47.     H 9.                         48.     L 7. Leading out the
                                             stones on line L, which
                                             are now threatened.
49.     G 11. This connects          50.     Q 3.
        White’s groups and
        prevents Black from
        extending.
51.     P 4.                         52.     Q 7. Making territory on
                                             the right and at the same
                                             time attacking White’s
                                             five stones.
53.     M 6. This move gives White   54.     L 6. Black must connect.
        the “Sente.”
55.     P 7. Leading out the small   56.     N 8. A dangerous move.
        White group.
                                             Comment by Honinbo Shuye:

                                             “This move may be called a
                                             little dangerous. P 6
                                             would have been
                                             preferable, and if White
                                             responds at O 8 or O 7,
                                             Black could reply at L 9.”
57.     P 8.                         58.     P 6.
59.     O 6.                         60.     O 7. (“Kiru.”) Cutting off
                                             connection of the white
                                             groups.
61.     M 2. Since White is cut      62.     K 9. Black sees that White
        off at O 7, he must form             can form the necessary two
        “Me” in this group.                  “Me,” and therefore does
                                             not press the attack.
63.     Q 8.                         64.     R 7. Black must extend in
                                             this way.
65.     R 8.                         66.     S 8. (“Osaeru.”)
67.     S 9.                         68.     S 7. (“Tsugu.”) The usual
                                             series of moves.
69.     P 5. (“Atari.”)              70.     Q 6.
71.     Q 10.                        72.     Q 11.
73.     R 9.                         74.     P 10. (“Sente.”)
75.     O 10. White must sacrifice   76.     S 10.
        No. 71 in order to escape.
77.     N 9.                         78.     M 8.
79.     P 9.                         80.     Q 9. Takes. This is “Ko.”
81.     T 10. (“Haneru.”)            82.     T 11. (“Osaeru.”)
83.     Q 10. Taking in “Ko.”        84.     P 11. (“Tsugu.”) Black
                                             must play here to save the
                                             frontier.
85.     T 9. Saving the stone at T   86.     R 11. Black cannot neglect
        10.                                  to play here.
87.     O 11.                        88.     L 11.
89.     L 10.                        90.     K 10.
91.     Q 3. White must break up     92.     P 12.
        Black’s territory in the
        upper right-hand corner.
93.     M 11. White retreats.        94.     M 10.
95.     L 12.                        96.     L 9. Takes. White has
                                             escaped by means of
                                             sacrificing one stone.
97.     P 13.                        98.     O 12.
99.     N 12.                        100.    O 13.
101.    S 12. (“Nozoku.”)            102.    K 12.
103.    O 14.                        104.    N 13. (“Shicho.”)
105.    L 13.                        106.    P 14. Cuts White off.
107.    P 15.                        108.    Q 14.
109.    Q 15.                        110.    R 14.
111.    R 15.                        112.    S 14. All these last moves
                                             are obviously necessary.
113.    O 15. Connecting.            114.    S 15.
115.    R 16.                        116.    M 14.

                                             Comment by Honinbo Shuye:

                                             “This move is a mistake;
                                             it should have been played
                                             at M 15.”
117.    K 14. White’s stones in      118.    M 16.
        the upper left-hand corner
        are now connected.
119.    G 10. A defensive move.      120.    F 9. (“Tsugu.”)
        White attempts to get all
        his stones in one group.
121.    J 12. Protects the           122.    J 11.
        connection at H 10.
123.    J 13.                        124.    N 10. Protecting the “Me”
                                             at L 10. K 11 is “Kageme.”
125.    N 11.                        126.    O 17.
127.    L 15.                        128.    M 15. White’s situation in
                                             the upper right-hand
                                             corner looks very bad at
                                             this point.
129.    Q 17.                        130.    R 18. A better move than Q
                                             16.
131.    N 17.                        132.    N 18.
133.    Q 18.                        134.    S 17.
135.    M 17.                        136.    N 16. White is prevented
                                             from connecting.
137.    M 18.                        138.    M 13. Threatening White’s
                                             other connection.
139.    M 12. White must connect.    140.    P 18. To an inexpert eye
                                             White’s group in the upper
                                             right-hand corner now
                                             looks hopeless.
141.    Q 19. This is to prevent     142.    O 16. Black must play here
        “Watari.”                            to protect his four
                                             stones.
143.    S 16.                        144.    T 16. (“Watari.”)
145.    T 15. A sacrifice to         146.    T 14. Black must take the
        prevent Black from forming           stone.
        “Me.”
147.    R 13. The condition in       148.    S 13.
        this corner of the board
        is now a fine example of
        “Semeai.”
149.    S 18.                        150.    T 18.
151.    S 19. The situation is now   152.    R 12. White’s sacrifice at
        highly interesting.                  T 15 is now bearing fruit.
153.    R 17.                        154.    T 17. Neither side can
                                             play at T 19 without loss.
155.    P 16. Takes. Forming a       156.    C 13. Increasing Black’s
        perfect “Me,” the other              territory.
        being at R 18. The play in
        this corner is now
        complete.
157.    B 5. Protecting the          158.    G 13.
        corner.
159.    H 11.                        160.    L 16.
161.    K 16.                        162.    F 15. Extending Black’s
                                             frontiers.
163.    F 17.                        164.    J 15.

                                             Comment by Honinbo Shuye:

                                             “Black’s moves 164 and 166
                                             are both useless. At move
                                             164 Black should have
                                             played at D 15.”
165.    H 16.                        166.    G 16.
167.    H 15.                        168.    D 15.
169.    D 16.                        170.    D 14.
171.    G 15.                        172.    B 15.
173.    B 16.                        174.    C 14. Completing the
                                             frontier.
175.    P 2.                         176.    Q 2.
177.    Q 1.                         178.    R 1.
179.    P 1.                         180.    R 2. The usual series of
                                             moves in such a situation.
181.    C 16. We might say that      182.    J 2.
        the end game commences at
        about this point.
183.    L 2.                         184.    K 3.
185.    A 7.                         186.    F 16.
187.    G 17.                        188.    F 13. The stone at G 13
                                             needs support.
189.    H 13. A very good move to    190.    A 8. Stopping White’s
        protect White’s group.               invasion.
191.    B 6.                         192.    B 7.
193.    A 6.                         194.    B 8. The usual moves.
195.    B 14.                        196.    B 13.
197.    A 15. Takes.                 198.    L 17.
199.    L 18. Completing the         200.    M 19.
        frontier.
201.    K 18.                        202.    J 6. All the rest of the
                                             board is practically
                                             finished.
203.    F 11.                        204.    E 11.
205.    E 16.                        206.    E 15.
207.    H 14.                        208.    G 14.
209.    E 5.                         210.    E 12.
211.    H 5.                         212.    J 5.
213.    H 4.                         214.    J 4.
215.    G 3.                         216.    J 9.

                                             Comment by Honinbo Shuye:

                                             “This move is
                                             unprofitable. Had Black
                                             played at J 8, a very good
                                             profit would have been
                                             secured.”
217.    J 8.                         218.    E 4.
219.    F 5.                         220.    D 1.
221.    C 1.                         222.    D 6. Black must connect.
223.    O 9.                         224.    M 9.
225.    K 13.                        226.    K 11.
227.    J 7.                         228.    H 6.
229.    H 10.                        230.    G 12.
231.    H 12.                        232.    K 7.
233.    N 7.                         234.    O 8.
235.    S 5. By sacrificing one      236.    Q 4.
        stone White forces Black
        to fill two spaces.
237.    T 8.                         238.    T 7.
239.    J 1.                         240.    K 2.
241.    K 1.                         242.    A 13.
243.    L 19.                        244.    N 19.
245.    P 19.                        246.    O 18.
247.    A 14.                        248.    L 14.
249.    K 15.                        250.    M 5.
251.    N 5.                         252.    K 8.
253.    Q 9. (“Ko tsugu.”)

Here the game is left as finished in the published report, but the
remaining moves are not all strictly speaking “Dame.” There are quite a
number of moves to be made before we can proceed to the count. The
first question is, naturally, what stones are dead, and we find that
White has three dead stones at S 12, S 5, and K 4. Black has three dead
stones at J 15, O 4, and R 18. The white stones at P, Q, and R 13, are
not dead yet. They have aggressive possibilities, and must be actually
surrounded. As near as we can judge the game would proceed as follows:

First: Necessary although obvious moves which are not strictly “Dame.”

        WHITE                                BLACK

                                     254.    Q 12. The three white
                                             stones must be taken
                                             before Black is safe.
255.    R 19. White must take this   256.    T 15. A necessary
        before filling T 19.                 connection.
257.    N 6. Necessary to form
        connection.


Second: The following moves which are strictly “Dame.” It makes no
difference which side fills these intersections, but it would generally
be done as follows:

        WHITE                                BLACK

                                     258.    T 19.
259.    O 19.                        260.    P 17.
261.    N 15.                        262.    N 14.
263.    F 12.                        264.    J 10.
265.    H 7.                         266.    M 7.
267.    M 4.                         268.    M 3.

The frontiers are now absolutely in contact, and the count can be made,
and it will be seen that after filling up the vacant territory with the
captured stones as far as they will go, Black has won by three points.
The Japanese would rearrange the board in order to make the counting of
the spaces more easy (“Me wo tsukuru”), but for the first game or two
the beginner might find it less confusing to omit this process.

Honinbo Shuye comments on this game as follows:

“In spite of so many errors, Black wins showing how great is the
advantage resulting from a handicap.”





II

Plate 15

White.—Murase Shuho, seventh degree.

Black.—Uchigaki Sutekichi, fifth degree.

This game is taken from Korschelt, and the notes are his. In some of
these notes will be found mere repetitions of matter that I have
inserted in the preceding chapters, or which will be hereafter found in
the chapter on “Joseki.” These notes are, however, very full and
valuable, and a little repetition may have the effect of aiding the
memory of the student, and will do no harm. Contrary to the custom,
this game was played without handicaps.

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      R 16. In the beginning of    2.      D 17.
        the game the corners and
        margins are first
        occupied, because it is
        there that positions can
        most easily be taken which
        cannot be killed, and
        which also contain
        territory. From the edges
        and corners the player
        makes toward the center.
        This process is repeated
        in every game.
3.      Q 3. In taking a corner      4.      P 17. The attack could
        that is still vacant there           also be commenced at P 16.
        is a choice among seven
        points; e.g., in the
        corner designated as D 4,
        these points are D 3, D 4,
        D 5, C 4, C 5, E 3, and E
        4. On the other hand, C 3
        and E 5 are bad, because
        the territory which is
        obtained by C 3 is too
        small, and the adversary
        would reply to E 5 with D
        4, by means of which E 5
        would be cut off from the
        margin. Of moves that are
        good D 3-C 4 are the
        surest, and most
        frequently used. E 4-D 5
        formerly were the favorite
        moves, but the preceding
        moves are now preferred to
        them. E 3-C 5 are seldom
        used. All of this, of
        course, applies to the
        corresponding points in
        the other three corners.
5.      C 4.                         6.      Q 6. Corresponding to No.
                                             4, this move should have
                                             been played at R 5 or Q 5,
                                             but White plays on Q 6,
                                             because if he played on Q
                                             5, Black would have
                                             replied at R 10 or R 9,
                                             and later White P 5 and
                                             Black O 4 would have
                                             followed, with the result
                                             that White has nothing,
                                             while Black has obtained
                                             two positions, one on O-Q
                                             and the other on R.
7.      O 4. Beginners would have    8.      D 15. The position D 15–D
        replied to Q 6 with Q 5 or           17 is very strong, and
        R 5. They attack their               players like to take it.
        opponent at close quarters           This applies, of course,
        from the beginning,                  to the corresponding
        because they cannot take             positions in other parts
        in the whole field at a              of the board, of which
        glance. Their entire                 there are seven; i.e., C
        effort is to absorb the              16–E 16, Q 3–Q 5, etc. As
        last stone that their                soon as one player gets a
        opponent has played. When            position of the kind his
        two beginners play                   opponent often takes a
        together the battle moves            similar position on the
        slowly from a corner out             next move in order to
        over the board, and one              balance the advantage
        side of the board is                 gained by his adversary;
        entirely filled with                 this is something like
        stones, while the other is           castling in Chess.
        completely empty. This is
        a sure sign of bad play.
        In the beginning the good
        players spread their
        stones over the board as
        much as possible, and
        avoid close conflicts.
9.      E 4.                         10.     C 10. If White did not
                                             occupy this point, we
                                             might have the following
                                             continuation:

                                                 B. C 10 W. C 7
                                                 B. C 13 W. E 7

                                             and Black has the
                                             advantage, because White’s
                                             stones at C 7-E 7 can only
                                             get one “Me” on the edge
                                             of the board, and later on
                                             must seek a connection
                                             with some other group. By
                                             constantly harassing such
                                             endangered groups
                                             territory is often
                                             obtained.
11.     R 13. In place of taking     12.     C 5. White sees that Black
        this secure position on              plays too carefully, and
        line R, Black should have            therefore challenges him
        attacked the white stone             with a bold but premature
        on P 17 with L 17, and in            attack that gives the
        this way Black would have            whole game its character.
        obtained positions on both
        line 17 and on line R.
13.     D 5.                         14.     C 6.
15.     B 4.                         16.     D 6.
17.     E 6.                         18.     E 7.
19.     F 6.                         20.     H 3. As soon as Black
                                             answers this move, White
                                             will take territory on the
                                             right or left of H 3.
21.     G 2. Is played very          22.     M 3. Two stones which
        carefully. K 3 would                 mutually support each
        probably have been better.           other on the margin of the
        In that case White would             board and form a position
        either have played H 5 in            cannot be separated by
        order to save H 3,                   more than two spaces; for
        whereupon                            instance, R 13–R 16. In
                                             that case the adversary
            B. F 7 W. E 8                    cannot cut one off from
            B. K 5                           the other. (Korschelt here
                                             inserts continuations
        would have followed, or              similar to what we have
        White would have answered            shown in a preceding
        at K 4.                              chapter.) Therefore,
                                             White’s twentieth and
                                             twenty-second moves are
                                             merely intended to fill
                                             territory that would
                                             otherwise fall to Black,
                                             and are not intended to
                                             form a new group.
23.     H 2. The only correct        24.     M 5. White seeks to form a
        answer would have been K             connection with No. 6,
        3, which would have                  which Black frustrates by
        separated White’s                    his twenty-fifth move. It
        twentieth and                        is of the greatest
        twenty-second stones.                importance to prevent the
                                             union of groups which the
                                             adversary has formed on
                                             the margin, in order that
                                             they may remain weak, and
                                             require continuous
                                             defense.

                                             The player who has the
                                             “Sente” most of the time
                                             will generally be the
                                             victor.
25.     O 6.                         26.     Q 9. Is very necessary in
                                             order not to surrender the
                                             entire right side to
                                             Black.
27.     K 17. All good players       28.     H 17. This move has the
        agree that 27 should not             effect of abandoning stone
        have been played at K 17,            No. 4 at P 17. After
        but at L 17. This is                 Black’s twenty-ninth move
        difficult to understand              at N 17, No. 4 could still
        because K 17 can be                  escape by means of P 15,
        supported from both sides            but giving it up brings
        at G 17 and N 17, but L 17           more territory elsewhere
        is better because Black              than is there lost. It is
        should be occupied not               a favorite device of
        merely with taking a                 strong players to
        position, but more                   apparently abandon a
        particularly with killing            position to their
        White’s fourth stone. In             adversary after first
        the sequel K 17 is                   preparing it so that
        actually taken by White.             eventually it may live, or
                                             so that it may afterward
                                             aid in surrounding one of
                                             the adversary’s groups.
                                             The abandoned position
                                             often reawakens to life if
                                             the weaker adversary
                                             allows his surrounding
                                             group to be itself
                                             surrounded and taken
                                             before the capture of the
                                             abandoned position has
                                             been completed.
29.     N 17.                        30.     F 7.
31.     G 7.                         32.     K 3. It might have been
                                             better to have played at G
                                             8. Then if Black replied
                                             at H 7, White could play
                                             at C 10, and the white
                                             territory in the
                                             neighborhood of line D
                                             would be very large.
                                             Certainly in that case H 3
                                             would have been abandoned,
                                             but not M 3-M 5. Since 32
                                             K 3 is purely defensive,
                                             Black gets the attack, and
                                             appreciably reduces the
                                             white territory in the
                                             neighborhood of line D.
33.     D 8.                         34.     D 7.
35.     D 11.                        36.     C 11.
37.     D 12.                        38.     C 12.
39.     D 13.                        40.     C 13.
41.     G 9.                         42.     G 6. If this move had not
                                             divided the black groups,
                                             Black would have become
                                             too powerful.
43.     H 7.                         44.     E 9. This connects the two
                                             parts of the White
                                             position, which connection
                                             was threatened by Black’s
                                             thirty-third stone.
                                             Moreover, the “Sente”
                                             remains with White,
                                             because Black cannot allow
                                             his position to be broken
                                             into through F 10.
45.     G 12.                        46.     Q 14.
47.     R 14.                        48.     R 17.
49.     S 17.                        50.     Q 16.
51.     R 15.                        52.     R 11. The beginner will
                                             wonder that 52 Q 15 did
                                             not follow 51 R 15. This
                                             is because 53 R 10–54 R 9
                                             would result, and White
                                             would be at a
                                             disadvantage. The moves
                                             46–52 are part of a deeply
                                             thought-out plan on the
                                             part of White. Black could
                                             afford to ignore No. 4 as
                                             long as it stood alone.
                                             Thereupon White increases
                                             it by Nos. 48 and 50, and
                                             Black must accept the
                                             sacrifice, because
                                             otherwise Nos. 27–29 are
                                             threatened. By this
                                             sacrifice White gets the
                                             territory around No. 27,
                                             and also has an
                                             opportunity of increasing
                                             his position on line Q by
                                             his fifty-second move.
53.     O 16.                        54.     M 16. On the fifty-third
                                             move Black proceeds with
                                             the capture of Nos. 4, 48,
                                             and 50, while White on his
                                             fifty-fourth move hems in
                                             No. 27.
55.     H 16. This move is ignored   56.     M 17.
        by White because Black
        must reply to his
        fifty-sixth and
        fifty-eighth moves in
        order to save Nos. 29 and
        53.
57.     N 18.                        58.     M 18.
59.     Q 15.                        60.     J 17.
61.     J 16.                        62.     K 18.
63.     E 16.                        64.     D 16.
65.     G 17.                        66.     K 16.
67.     P 16. This is necessary to   68.     K 15.
        avoid the following
        continuation:

        W. P 16, O 15, N 16, O 14
        B. P 15, N 15, O 17, P 18

        and White has the
        advantage.
69.     D 14.                        70.     C 14.
71.     R 5.                         72.     R 6.
73.     E 15. It is of the utmost    74.     Q 5. Murase Shuho thought
        importance to Black to               that 74 was a bad move and
        occupy this point, for               that S 5 would have been
        otherwise White would                better. The game would
        press far into his                   then have continued as
        territory through this               follows:
        opening. He goes first,
        however, on his                      B. 73. E 15, R 4
        seventy-first move to R 5,           W. S 5, S 4
        because White must follow,
        and then to 73, because on           He also thought that
        this move he loses the               White’s moves from 76–82
        “Sente.” Black could also            were bad, because nothing
        have occupied S 5, to                in particular was
        which White would have               accomplished by separating
        replied with S 6, because            O 4 from O 6, since it was
        otherwise the following              impossible to kill them.
        continuation would have
        occurred:

        B. S 5, S 6, S 8, R 8, Q 8
        W. E 15, S 7, T 7, R 7

        and the White position is
        broken up. It is because
        Black played at E 15 too
        hastily and without first
        occupying S 5 that White
        can break up the Black
        position by the series of
        moves Nos. 74–82.
75.     S 5.                         76.     Q 4.
77.     R 3.                         78.     P 3.
79.     P 2.                         80.     O 3.
81.     O 2.                         82.     P 4.
83.     N 8.                         84.     L 8.
85.     O 10.                        86.     F 3.
87.     G 3.                         88.     F 4.
89.     E 3.                         90.     G 5.
91.     E 5. Black has played on     92.     J 6.
        this point because
        otherwise E 6–F 6 will
        die; thus,

        W. E 5, B. F 5 takes
        W. E 5 retakes

93.     G 4. This is intended to     94.     H 14. From this point on,
        secure H 2, G 2 and G 3.             the territory in the
        The simplest way of doing            center is filled up. Black
        this would be to play at F           and White seem to get it
        2, but G 4 gains six more            in about equal parts.
        “Me” because F 3–F 4 may
        be regarded as taken.
95.     L 10.                        96.     J 11.
97.     H 11.                        98.     F 14.
99.     E 14.                        100.    H 10.
101.    G 10.                        102.    H 12.
103.    G 11.                        104.    O 8.
105.    Q 10.                        106.    R 10.
107.    P 8.                         108.    P 9.
109.    O 9.                         110.    O 7.
111.    P 10.                        112.    R 8.
113.    N 7.                         114.    P 7.
115.    L 9.                         116.    K 8.
117.    J 9.                         118.    K 12.
119.    J 10.                        120.    N 6.
121.    A 7. This move is worthy     122.    B 7.
        of study.
123.    N 2.                         124.    J 5.
125.    E 18.                        126.    D 18.
127.    G 18.                        128.    G 13.
129.    M 12.                        130.    F 12.
131.    F 11.                        132.    E 10.
133.    E 11.                        134.    S 12.
135.    S 13.                        136.    N 14.
137.    L 12.                        138.    L 13.
139.    M 13.                        140.    L 14.
141.    K 11.                        142.    J 12.
143.    A 6.                         144.    A 8.
145.    B 5.                         146.    B 6.
147.    A 5.                         148.    B 8.
149.    S 6.                         150.    S 7.
151.    M 8.                         152.    M 6. Not at M 7, because
                                             that would lead to the
                                             loss of K 8–L 8.
153.    D 19.                        154.    C 19.
155.    E 19.                        156.    C 18.
157.    N 3.                         158.    N 4.
159.    L 2.                         160.    L 3.
161.    K 2.                         162.    F 5.
163.    F 2.                         164.    E 17.
165.    F 17.                        166.    H 19.
167.    H 18.                        168.    J 18.
169.    G 19.                        170.    P 14.
171.    P 15.                        172.    N 19.
173.    O 19.                        174.    M 19.
175.    O 17.                        176.    R 4.
177.    S 4.                         178.    T 6.
179.    R 12.                        180.    S 11.
181.    O 13.                        182.    O 14.
183.    P 13.

This is as far as the game is recorded in the Go magazine, published by
Murase Shuho. A good player can now foresee the result at the cost of a
little trouble. Black has won by five points.

According to Korschelt’s view, the play would have proceeded as
follows:

        BLACK                               WHITE

                                     184.    T 5.
185.    T 4.                         186.    T 7.
187.    S 3.                         188.    G 15.
189.    G 16.                        190.    J 8.
191.    H 8.                         192.    N 13.
193.    N 12.                        194.    M 14.
195.    J 7.                         196.    K 7.
197.    F 8.                         198.    E 8.
199.    D 10.                        200.    D 9.
201.    J 15.                        202.    J 14.
203.    J 19. Takes.                 204.    K 19.
205.    Q 11.                        206.    F 15.
207.    F 16.                        208.    J 2.
209.    J 1.                         210.    J 3.
211.    M 7.                         212.    L 7.
213.    H 4.                         214.    J 4.
215.    N 15.                        216.    K 9.
217.    K 10.                        218.    M 2.
219.    M 1.                         220.    Q 13.
221.    M 15.                        222.    L 15.
223.    F 9.                         224.    Q 12.
225.    P 12.                        226.    T 13.
227.    T 14.                        228.    T 12.
229.    H 19.

The stones that are still to be played are “Dame.” By playing these no
“Me” can be either won or lost, and for the most part it makes no
difference whether they are filled up by Black or White. These are as
follows:

O 15, N 16, H 5, H 6, F 13, E 13, H 5, H 15, F 10, E 13 E 12, H 15, F
10.

Black has sixty-four “Me” and White fifty-seven “Me.”





III

Black.—Ito Kotaro, fifth degree.

White.—Karigane Junichi, sixth degree.

This game was played in Tokio about January, 1907, and is a fine
illustration of the rule of “Ko.” No handicaps were given.

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      C 4. (“Komoku.”) Black       2.      Q 3.
        being the weaker player,
        adopts a conservative
        opening.
3.      D 17.                        4.      C 15.
5.      E 3. The opening is          6.      C 9. This is an unusual
        conventional so far.                 move.
7.      F 16.                        8.      C 17.
9.      C 18.                        10.     D 16.
11.     E 17.                        12.     Q 17.
13.     R 15.                        14.     R 6.
15.     R 11.                        16.     K 3.
17.     N 17.                        18.     D 12. Not the best move. P
                                             16 would have been better.
                                             This part of the game is
                                             generally devoted to the
                                             general distribution of
                                             stones.
19.     P 16. White’s stone at Q     20.     P 17.
        17 is now shut in. If the
        black stone at N 17 were
        at M 17, White could have
        escaped.
21.     O 17.                        22.     S 16.
23.     R 16.                        24.     R 17.
25.     S 15.                        26.     S 17.
27.     P 18.                        28.     Q 18.
29.     O 19. Probably not the       30.     S 19. The corner is a
        best. O 15 would have had            typical Go problem. White
        greater possibilities.               had to place this stone
                                             very carefully in order to
                                             provide for the necessary
                                             two “Me.”
31.     J 16. Not the best. O 15     32.     Q 16.
        would have been better.
33.     Q 15.                        34.     P 15. Cutting Black’s
                                             connection. The necessity
                                             for a black stone at O 15
                                             is now apparent.
35.     O 16.                        36.     P 14.
37.     R 13.                        38.     Q 12.
39.     Q 11.                        40.     P 12.
41.     P 11.                        42.     M 13.
43.     R 8. Not the best move. N    44.     K 16. White now commences
        11 would have been more              a series of moves to break
        aggressive.                          up Black’s territory at
                                             the top of the board.
45.     K 17.                        46.     L 17.
47.     L 16.                        48.     K 15.
49.     L 15.                        50.     J 17.
51.     K 18.                        52.     H 17.
53.     L 18.                        54.     J 15.
55.     H 16.                        56.     G 16.
57.     H 15.                        58.     G 15.
59.     H 14.                        60.     G 17.
61.     J 13.                        62.     O 11.
63.     O 10.                        64.     N 11.
65.     N 10.                        66.     M 11.
67.     K 12. An ineffective move;   68.     B 17.
        B 17 would have been
        better.
69.     B 18.                        70.     F 15.
71.     F 18. Black must defend      72.     A 18.
        his corner, which is
        already much reduced in
        size.
73.     G 19.                        74.     L 14.
75.     K 14. The three white        76.     M 15.
        stones, J 15, K 15, and K
        16 are dead. They were
        sacrificed in order to
        break up Black’s territory
        at the top of the board.
77.     M 16.                        78.     Q 8.
79.     Q 7.                         80.     R 7.
81.     P 8.                         82.     S 8.
83.     Q 9. Takes.                  84.     R 9.
85.     O 13. An effort to deprive   86.     O 14.
        the white group of the
        necessary “Me” and to
        envelop them.
87.     N 13.                        88.     N 14.
89.     L 10.                        90.     L 11.
91.     K 10. K 11 would not do;     92.     R 12.
        White could break through
        in that case.
93.     S 12.                        94.     Q 13.
95.     S 10.                        96.     R 14.
97.     S 14.                        98.     S 13. Takes.
99.     T 13. “Watari.”              100.    L 12.
101.    N 12.                        102.    M 10.
103.    M 9.                         104.    K 11.
105.    J 11. White is now shut      106.    O 12. White saves his
        in.                                  group in this way because
                                             he can get the position
                                             called “Magari shimoku wa
                                             me” no matter what Black
                                             does.
107.    R 4.                         108.    Q 4.
109.    R 3.                         110.    R 2.
111.    S 2.                         112.    Q 2.
113.    S 5.                         114.    Q 6.
115.    S 1. Black’s corner is       116.    Q 8. Takes. “Ko.”
        small, but it will surely
        live.
117.    P 7.                         118.    P 9.
119.    R 8. “Ko.”                   120.    T 3. An effort to destroy
                                             the corner.
121.    S 3.                         122.    Q 8. “Ko.”
123.    P 10.                        124.    N 4. White eventually wins
                                             the game by means of the
                                             territory he now maps out.
125.    E 16.                        126.    E 15.
127.    D 14. “Nozoku.”              128.    D 15.
129.    C 7.                         130.    J 10.
131.    L 8.                         132.    H 11.
133.    J 12.                        134.    J 9.
135.    G 11. Not very good. Black   136.    N 8.
        should have played at K 8.
137.    N 9.                         138.    K 8.
139.    L 9. Black must play here    140.    B 4.
        to protect his two stones.
141.    B 3.                         142.    D 4.
143.    C 3.                         144.    C 5.
145.    C 6. An unusual way of       146.    N 6.
        playing the corner.
147.    L 6.                         148.    K 5.
149.    K 6.                         150.    J 5.
151.    J 6.                         152.    H 6.
153.    H 7.                         154.    G 10.
155.    F 11.                        156.    G 7.
157.    G 6.                         158.    H 5.
159.    G 8.                         160.    F 7.
161.    F 8.                         162.    H 8.
163.    J 7. Note how the center     164.    F 10.
        fills up without either
        side getting territory
        there.
165.    E 8.                         166.    E 7.
167.    E 11.                        168.    E 10.
169.    D 11.                        170.    D 8.
171.    D 7.                         172.    F 5.
173.    E 5.                         174.    F 6.
175.    C 14.                        176.    M 7.
177.    R 8. “Ko.” A weak move.      178.    B 14. White’s group is now
        White’s position is                  safe.
        already better, and Black
        should play at B 14, where
        he might have a chance to
        kill White’s group, in the
        upper left-hand corner.
179.    B 13.                        180.    A 14.
181.    C 12.                        182.    B 16. This is an
                                             interesting problem. If
                                             White plays at B 15, Black
                                             could kill the group.
183.    L 7.                         184.    D 5.
185.    C 8.                         186.    D 9.
187.    B 5.                         188.    B 6.
189.    A 4. Takes.                  190.    D 6.
191.    B 7.                         192.    B 8.
193.    A 6. Takes.                  194.    F 2. Defending his large
                                             territory on the lower
                                             edge of the board.
195.    E 4.                         196.    Q 8. “Ko.” Attacking
                                             Black’s group which has
                                             still to form the
                                             necessary two “Me.”
197.    J 8.                         198.    H 9. White cannot afford
                                             to fill the “Ko” at R 8.
199.    R 8. “Ko.”                   200.    G 18.
201.    H 19.                        202.    Q 8. “Ko.” Returning to
                                             the attack.
203.    O 9. Takes.                  204.    E 6. A necessary
                                             connection.
205.    G 4. Invading White’s        206.    G 5. Takes. White must do
        territory.                           this or lose ten stones.
207.    E 2.                         208.    G 3.
209.    P 6.                         210.    P 5.
211.    M 5.                         212.    N 5.
213.    M 4.                         214.    M 3. This ends Black’s
                                             invasion.
215.    F 4.                         216.    Q 14.
217.    R 13. “Ko.”                  218.    B 19. “Sente.”
219.    D 18. Black must connect.    220.    S 13. “Ko.”
221.    R 5.                         222.    Q 5.
223.    R 13. “Ko.” Black must win   224.    J 18.
        this “Ko” or lose five
        stones.
225.    J 19.                        226.    S 13. “Ko.”
227.    L 4. “Sente.”                228.    L 3.
229.    R 13. “Ko.” Black’s group    230.    H 12.
        is now safe.
231.    S 13. “Ko tsugu.”            232.    E 13.
233.    B 10.                        234.    B 9.
235.    F 13.                        236.    E 14.
237.    G 14.                        238.    H 3.
239.    S 6.                         240.    D 3.
241.    D 2.                         242.    C 10.
243.    C 11.                        244.    B 11.
245.    R 8. “Ko.”                   246.    M 6.
247.    L 5.                         248.    Q 8. “Ko.”
249.    R 1.                         250.    Q 1.
251.    R 8. “Ko.”                   252.    S 7.
253.    S 9.                         254.    Q 8. “Ko.”
255.    E 12.                        256.    D 13.
257.    R 8. “Ko.”                   258.    G 12. “Sente.”
259.    F 12.                        260.    Q 8. “Ko.”
261.    F 3.                         262.    G 2.
263.    R 8. “Ko.”                   264.    T 4.
265.    T 2. Black must defend his   266.    Q 8. “Ko.”
        group.
267.    T 16.                        268.    T 17.
269.    R 8. “Ko.”                   270.    T 6.
271.    T 5. Black must stop the     272.    Q 8. “Ko.”
        White advance.
273.    Q 19.                        274.    R 19.
275.    R 8. “Ko.”                   276.    P 19. “Ko.”
277.    O 18.                        278.    Q 8. “Ko.”
279.    S 18. If Black can also      280.    T 18.
        play at T 19, White’s
        corner is dead.
281.    R 8. “Ko.”                   282.    N 15.
283.    L 13. Purposely starting     284.    K 13. “Ko.”
        another “Ko.”
285.    B 12.                        286.    L 13. “Ko tsugu.”
287.    A 11. Takes.                 288.    Q 8. “Ko.”
289.    C 13.                        290.    R 8. “Ko tsugu.”
291.    K 9. Black must form         292.    O 6.
        another “Me” for this
        group at once.
293.    J 4.                         294.    H 4.
295.    K 4.                         296.    C 2.
297.    B 2.                         298.    E 1.
299.    C 1. Takes.                  300.    J 3.
301.    T 9. The game is             302.    N 16.
        practically over at this
        point.
303.    J 14. Taking three stones.   304.    O 8.
305.    T 19. Takes.                 306.    O 7.
307.    P 9. Connecting.             308.    T 15. Takes.
309.    T 8.                         310.    C 19.
311.    F 17.                        312.    A 13.
313.    A 12.                        314.    A 17.
315.    D 19.                        316.    A 19.
317.    R 10.                        318.    A 9.
319.    A 10.                        320.    Q 19. “Ko tsugu.”
321.    A 7.

The game as published ends at this point, but there still remain moves
to be made that are not strictly “Dame.” White must kill the three
black stones at E 8, F 8, and G 8, as that portion of the board is not
quite disposed of, and “Seki” might easily occur if White plays badly.
The game might continue as follows:

        BLACK                                WHITE

                                     322.    F 1.
323.    G 13.                        324.    E 9.
325.    H 13.                        326.    H 10. White must connect.
327.    A 8.                         328.    F 9.
329.    D 10.                        330.    G 9. White must take the
                                             three stones.
331.    D 1. Stopping White’s        332.    T 16. “Tsugu.”
        advance.

The following moves are strictly “Dame”: F 14, H 18, M 8, O 15, T 14.
Either side can fill these “Me.”

The following stones are dead and can now be removed:

White.—K 8, L 17, T 3, T 4. Black.—N 12, N 13, O 13, S 18.

White wins by four stones. After the dead stones are used to fill up
the vacant spaces, and the board is rearranged, it will be found that
White has fourteen “Me” and Black ten “Me.”

More than the usual number of moves were made in this game.





IV

Plate 16

White.—Hirose Heijiro, fifth degree.

Black.—Nagano Keijiro, fourth degree.

Black has a handicap of two stones. (D 4 and Q 16.)

Played March, 1907, in Tokio. Both players were of the Hoyensha School.

When this game was published, it was annotated by Mr. Iwasaki Kenzo,
and I have translated his annotations; these are indicated by the
initials “I. K.”

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 4.                         2.      C 16.
3.      E 17.                        4.      D 15.
5.      C 11. To prevent Black       6.      C 7. P 3 would have been
        forming territory on the             better. (Iwasaki Kenzo.)
        left side.
7.      O 3.                         8.      R 10. This move is called
                                             “Moku Shita.” It is one of
                                             Murase Shuho’s inventions.
9.      R 14. White breaks into      10.     R 6.
        Black’s territory at once.
11.     O 17.                        12.     O 16. These moves will be
                                             found in the chapter on
                                             “Joseki.”
13.     N 16.                        14.     O 15.
15.     P 17.                        16.     Q 17.
17.     Q 13. White must look out    18.     R 15. This move secures
        for the stone at R 14.               the corner, and at the
                                             same time protects the
                                             connection of Black’s
                                             stones on lines O and Q.
                                             “Ikkyo ryo toku.”
19.     O 13.                        20.     N 14.
21.     L 17. Replies to Black’s     22.     Q 14.
        last move.
23.     S 14.                        24.     F 16.
25.     G 17.                        26.     S 15. Secures the corner.
27.     P 10.                        28.     Q 8. P 6 would have been
                                             better. (I. K.)
29.     C 14.                        30.     D 14.
31.     C 13.                        32.     D 12. Not the best move. M
                                             3 would have been better.
                                             (I. K.)
33.     D 11.                        34.     E 12.
35.     E 11.                        36.     F 11.
37.     F 12. White cuts off. This   38.     F 13. G 14 would have been
        is an aggressive move.               better. (I. K.)
39.     G 12.                        40.     F 10.
41.     G 13.                        42.     F 14.
43.     D 8. White provides an       44.     H 15. H 14 was better, as
        escape for stones on line            White dare not cut off at
        11.                                  G 14. (I. K.)
45.     H 10.                        46.     F 8.
47.     D 7.                         48.     C 6.
49.     D 6.                         50.     D 5.
51.     F 6.                         52.     H 9. Black must provide an
                                             exit for his stones on
                                             line E.
53.     J 10. White cannot risk      54.     H 8.
        jumping farther.
55.     H 17. Not good. K 8 would    56.     K 8. Black promptly
        have been better. (I. K.)            escapes.
57.     C 8. Good, but not the       58.     L 10. Black commences an
        best. M 12 would have                attack on White’s five
        helped the white stones              stones.
        near the center.
59.     J 14. White retreats.        60.     J 15.
61.     L 14.                        62.     L 15.
63.     L 12.                        64.     J 12. This is a “Sute
                                             ishi,” but it greatly aids
                                             Black’s attack.
65.     K 12. Not a good move. By    66.     K 15.
        reason of this Black’s
        sixty-eighth move is made
        possible. (I. K.)
67.     J 13. Another move which     68.     K 17. Attacks White’s
        arrests the development of           stones at the top of the
        the game. (I. K.)                    board.
69.     K 18.                        70.     L 18.
71.     J 17.                        72.     M 17.
73.     K 16. Takes.                 74.     L 16. Black’s attack on
                                             the upper right-hand
                                             corner is now well
                                             developed.
75.     P 8. White abandons the      76.     P 7.
        field and plays elsewhere.
77.     O 8.                         78.     H 5.
79.     F 4.                         80.     H 3.
81.     F 2.                         82.     D 2.
83.     F 7. White perfects his      84.     M 3.
        connection.
85.     Q 9.                         86.     R 9.
87.     Q 7.                         88.     R 8.
89.     P 6.                         90.     M 5. Black enlarges his
                                             territory at the bottom of
                                             the board.
91.     O 7. Takes.                  92.     S 5. Forming “Me” for the
                                             side group.
93.     C 18. Stronger than C 17.    94.     K 17. Takes in “Ko.”
95.     S 4.                         96.     R 12.
97.     P 14.                        98.     Q 15.
99.     R 13.                        100.    T 4.
101.    L 17. Takes in “Ko.”         102.    M 18.
103.    K 3. Invading Black’s        104.    L 4.
        territory. White can
        connect on either side.
105.    H 2.                         106.    G 3.
107.    J 3.                         108.    J 4.
109.    G 2.                         110.    M 7.
111.    E 2.                         112.    C 3. If Black plays at D
                                             3, White could reply at D
                                             1 with the “Sente.”
113.    L 8. Threatening Black’s     114.    K 9.
        territory. If Black
        defends, White can connect
        somewhere.
115.    J 6.                         116.    H 6.
117.    L 6. White’s attack on       118.    L 7.
        this territory is very
        fine.
119.    K 4.                         120.    K 5.
121.    J 5.                         122.    K 6.
123.    H 4. Takes.                  124.    S 3.
125.    R 3.                         126.    S 2.
127.    J 7.                         128.    M 9. Black cannot neglect
                                             this—the whole center of
                                             the board might be lost.
129.    R 2.                         130.    H 7.
131.    T 15.                        132.    S 17. Better than T 16, as
                                             it provides for “Me” in
                                             the corner.
133.    S 12.                        134.    S 11.
135.    L 19.                        136.    K 17. Takes in “Ko.”
137.    N 9.                         138.    N 8.
139.    L 17. Takes in “Ko.”         140.    M 16.
141.    N 7.                         142.    M 8.
143.    B 17.                        144.    B 16.
145.    B 8.                         146.    M 12. Threatening to
                                             surround the ten white
                                             stones in the center.
147.    E 9.                         148.    F 9.
149.    K 14. Forming “Me” for       150.    G 11.
        group in center.
151.    H 11.                        152.    H 14.
153.    M 11.                        154.    H 13.
155.    H 12.                        156.    M 13.
157.    L 11.                        158.    S 1. This move is worth
                                             five or six points.
159.    B 6. B 5 might have been     160.    B 5.
        more aggressive.
161.    B 7.                         162.    C 5.
163.    N 5.                         164.    N 6.
165.    N 4.                         166.    L 2.
167.    N 2.                         168.    M 2. Otherwise White would
                                             play at L 3.
169.    G 5.                         170.    A 13. This stone is
                                             connected with stone at B
                                             16. This move often
                                             occurs.
171.    B 12.                        172.    D 17.
173.    E 18.                        174.    Q 12.
175.    P 12.                        176.    T 16.
177.    E 16.                        178.    E 15.
179.    R 5.                         180.    S 7.
181.    R 1.                         182.    Q 6.
183.    Q 5. This part of the        184.    M 19.
        board is now completed.
185.    A 5.                         186.    A 4.
187.    A 6.                         188.    B 4.
189.    M 4.                         190.    L 3.
191.    K 2.                         192.    K 19. Takes.
193.    J 19.                        194.    K 17. Takes in “Ko.”
195.    L 19. Takes in “Ko.”         196.    F 17.
197.    F 18.                        198.    D 18.
199.    C 17.                        200.    D 16.
201.    D 19. “Watari.”              202.    E 10.
203.    D 10.                        204.    E 8.
205.    M 10.                        206.    Q 10.
207.    K 10.                        208.    L 9. Takes.
209.    P 9.                         210.    L 13.
211.    K 13.                        212.    N 12.
213.    M 14.                        214.    N 13.
215.    N 11.                        216.    O 12.
217.    O 11.                        218.    O 14.
219.    P 13.                        220.    D 9. Takes.
221.    C 9.                         222.    Q 11.
223.    P 11.                        224.    J 16. Takes.
225.    G 16.                        226.    F 15.
227.    N 3.                         228.    M 6.
229.    T 14.                        230.    T 12.
231.    T 13.                        232.    S 13. Takes.
233.    P 15.                        234.    P 16.
235.    S 12. Takes in “Ko.”         236.    T 11.
237.    E 3.                         238.    O 6.
239.    O 5.                         240.    A 17.
241.    A 18.                        242.    A 16.
243.    A 12.                        244.    B 14.
245.    B 13.                        246.    A 14.
247.    D 3.                         248.    C 2.
249.    M 15.                        250.    N 15.

Black wins, the report says, by “Ichi ban,” which means anything up to
ten “Me.” According to my continuation, Black won by seven “Me.”





V

Plate 17

This is a game between a Japanese player and a beginner. It is inserted
solely to show the character of the mistakes which beginners are likely
to make. Such errors never occur in games between good players, and
therefore this game may be more useful to a novice than the games
contested between players of greater skill.

Played May 7, 1907.

Black has a handicap of five stones.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      C 14.                        2.      E 3. Bad; too close to the
                                             handicap stone. Besides it
                                             is better to respond to
                                             White’s attack in the same
                                             part of the board.
3.      O 3.                         4.      C 15. This would be too
                                             conservative if the
                                             players were anything like
                                             equal.
5.      R 14.                        6.      D 6. Much better to play
                                             in one of the right-hand
                                             corners. C 6 would be
                                             better also.
7.      F 17.                        8.      P 3. O 4 is much better.
9.      R 6.                         10.     Q 14.
11.     S 16. This would not be      12.     O 4. Black should reply to
        played against a good                White’s last move.
        player.
13.     N 3.                         14.     D 8. Unnecessary; much
                                             better to play in one of
                                             the threatened corners.
15.     C 3.                         16.     C 4. B 4 would be better.
17.     B 3.                         18.     D 2.
19.     D 3.                         20.     E 2.
21.     B 5.                         22.     B 4.
23.     A 4.                         24.     C 2.
25.     B 8.                         26.     D 5. Over cautious.
27.     C 7.                         28.     D 7. Unnecessary; Black
                                             could gain a decisive
                                             advantage at B 6.
29.     B 6.                         30.     C 8. Too near the White
                                             line, a common mistake of
                                             beginners.
31.     B 9.                         32.     B 2.
33.     A 3.                         34.     C 9. Too near; Black can
                                             jump one or two spaces
                                             with much better effect.
35.     C 10.                        36.     D 10.
37.     C 11.                        38.     D 14.
39.     C 13.                        40.     D 12. At this point
                                             Black’s position is good
                                             enough, as his line on D
                                             is very strong.
41.     C 17.                        42.     B 14.
43.     B 13.                        44.     C 12. Black gains very
                                             little by this.
45.     B 12.                        46.     B 15.
47.     D 17.                        48.     B 16. Very bad; Black has
                                             the whole board to gain
                                             ground in elsewhere.
49.     E 16.                        50.     D 15. If Black feels he
                                             must play here, D 13 is
                                             better.
51.     D 13.                        52.     E 13.
53.     E 12.                        54.     D 11.
55.     F 13.                        56.     E 14.
57.     G 12.                        58.     E 11.
59.     F 12.                        60.     F 11. If Black hopes to
                                             save his group in the
                                             upper left-hand corner, he
                                             must escape toward the
                                             center at this point.
61.     F 14. Black’s group is now   62.     A 14. Black cannot
        hopeless.                            possibly form “Me”; this
                                             move is merely wasted.
63.     J 3.                         64.     E 9. Too cautious.
65.     G 3.                         66.     H 11.
67.     G 11.                        68.     F 10. Black forms “Me” in
                                             this group long before it
                                             is threatened, while he
                                             might gain ground
                                             elsewhere.
69.     G 10.                        70.     A 16. Another lost move.
71.     F 4.                         72.     E 4.
73.     G 8.                         74.     G 9.
75.     H 9.                         76.     F 9.
77.     H 10.                        78.     F 8.
79.     G 7.                         80.     F 6.
81.     G 6.                         82.     G 5. Should have been
                                             played at F 5.
83.     F 5.                         84.     J 10. Black should play
                                             nearer the edge of the
                                             board. J 10 is radically
                                             wrong.
85.     K 8.                         86.     H 13. Black tries to form
                                             a living group in the
                                             center without support;
                                             this can seldom be done.
87.     H 12.                        88.     J 11.
89.     J 13.                        90.     H 8.
91.     J 8.                         92.     H 7. These stones are
                                             hopeless from the start.
                                             Black should play in the
                                             right-hand corners.
93.     H 6.                         94.     J 7.
95.     L 7.                         96.     J 6.
97.     H 5.                         98.     J 5.
99.     G 4. Takes.                  100.    J 9.
101.    M 6.                         102.    N 5. M 5 would be much
                                             better.
103.    M 5.                         104.    K 4. Black adds more
                                             stones to his already
                                             hopeless group. This is
                                             one of the commonest
                                             mistakes.
105.    M 4.                         106.    J 12. Black should jump to
                                             the right, say at M 11.
107.    K 13.                        108.    G 14. F 15 might have
                                             helped Black.
109.    F 15.                        110.    H 4.
111.    J 4.                         112.    F 7.
113.    H 3. Takes.                  114.    E 6. Unnecessary. Black
                                             should play somewhere in
                                             the unoccupied portion of
                                             the board.
115.    M 12.                        116.    A 13. Wholly wasted unless
                                             Black were an expert.
117.    B 11.                        118.    B 17.
119.    B 18.                        120.    C 18.
121.    D 18.                        122.    A 18.
123.    C 19. Takes.                 124.    C 6.
125.    B 7.                         126.    K 12. Like all beginners,
                                             Black keeps his stones too
                                             close together. M 10 would
                                             be better.
127.    L 13.                        128.    L 12.
129.    M 10.                        130.    M 11.
131.    N 11.                        132.    L 11.
133.    N 13.                        134.    L 10. Black again adds
                                             stones to a dead group.
135.    M 9.                         136.    L 8.
137.    M 8.                         138.    L 9.
139.    K 7.                         140.    O 6.
141.    P 5.                         142.    O 2. S 4 would have been
                                             much better.
143.    N 2.                         144.    N 1. Black overlooks that
                                             he must connect at P 2.
                                             This is a common error of
                                             novices.
145.    P 2.                         146.    J 14.
147.    K 16.                        148.    J 16.
149.    K 17.                        150.    K 15. Black tries to form
                                             another living group. His
                                             only chance was near Q
                                             14–Q 16.
151.    L 15.                        152.    L 14.
153.    M 14.                        154.    K 14.
155.    M 13.                        156.    M 15.
157.    L 16.                        158.    G 16. Black again adds to
                                             a hopeless position.
159.    G 17.                        160.    H 17.
161.    G 15.                        162.    H 15. Black thinks he has
                                             the necessary “Me.” Two of
                                             them, however, are
                                             “Kageme.”
163.    H 18.                        164.    J 18.
165.    J 17.                        166.    G 18.
167.    H 16. Takes, “Ko.”           168.    A 2. Black plays this
                                             correctly.
169.    A 5.                         170.    H 17. Takes, “Ko.”
171.    H 19.                        172.    K 18.
173.    H 16. Takes, “Ko.”           174.    L 18.
175.    H 17. “Ko tsugu.”            176.    M 17. Black has a chance
                                             to make some territory in
                                             this part of the board.
177.    O 17.                        178.    N 16.
179.    Q 17.                        180.    O 15.
181.    P 16.                        182.    Q 15.
183.    P 15.                        184.    R 17.
185.    R 16.                        186.    Q 18.
187.    P 17.                        188.    R 15.
189.    S 17.                        190.    R 13.
191.    S 14.                        192.    P 14.
193.    S 15.                        194.    O 13. Black should live,
                                             although he has gained
                                             little space.
195.    N 14.                        196.    P 12. Black should have
                                             occupied O 14.
197.    O 14. Black’s groups are     198.    N 18.
        now separated.
199.    O 18.                        200.    P 18.
201.    R 18. Takes.                 202.    O 12.
203.    N 12.                        204.    E 15. This is pure waste.
205.    M 19. If Black had played    206.    E 17.
        here his group would have
        lived.
207.    E 18. Takes.                 208.    A 12.
209.    A 11.                        210.    O 16. Too late; this group
                                             is hopeless now.
211.    Q 11.                        212.    Q 12.
213.    R 11.                        214.    O 11.
215.    O 10.                        216.    Q 2.
217.    O 1. Takes.                  218.    M 1. This is nonsense;
                                             Black might still save the
                                             corner by correct play.
219.    P 4.                         220.    Q 3.
221.    Q 5.                         222.    M 2. If Black played at S
                                             5 he would still have a
                                             chance.
223.    R 4.                         224.    O 5.
225.    P 10.                        226.    R 12.
227.    F 2.                         228.    F 1.
229.    G 1.                         230.    E 1.
231.    F 3.                         232.    C 1. Black wastes one of
                                             his few vacant spaces.
233.    R 3.                         234.    N 19.
        White permits Black to       235.    L 17.
        play again.
        White permits Black to       236.    J 19.
        play again.
237.    L 19.                        238.    M 18.
        White permits Black to       239.    P 19.
        play again.
        White permits Black to       240.    N 17.
        play again.
        White permits Black to       241.    R 19.
        play again.
242.    S 19.                        243.    O 19.
244.    R 17.

“Dame”—E 5 and C 5. White wins by one hundred and ninety-seven spaces
and eighty-eight stones.





VI

Plate 18

White.—Inouye Inseki.

Black.—Yasui Shintetsu.

Played December, 1835. No handicaps were given. This game is from a
Japanese work called “Kachi Sei Kioku.” The notes are taken from
Korschelt, and as in the previous instance involve the repetition of
some things that have been touched on in the preceding chapters.

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      R 16.                        2.      D 17.
3.      Q 3.                         4.      P 17.
5.      C 4.                         6.      C 14. Just as good as D
                                             15, which we already know.
7.      Q 5. This may be the best    8.      Q 14.
        play under the
        circumstances. The secure
        position Q 3-Q 5 supports
        the advance posts at C 4
        and R 16 in equal measure.
9.      P 16.                        10.     Q 16.
11.     Q 15.                        12.     Q 17.
13.     P 15.                        14.     R 15.
15.     R 14.                        16.     S 15.
17.     Q 13.                        18.     N 17. The eighth stone
                                             played at Q 14 cannot be
                                             saved. If White attempts
                                             to save it, the following
                                             would be the continuation:

                                                 B.     W.
                                                 P 14
                                                 O 14   P 13
                                                 P 12   O 13
                                                 N 13   O 12.
                                                 O 11 etc.

                                             If White had had an
                                             opportunity of placing a
                                             stone on the line of
                                             retreat at say E 3, then
                                             White could have saved No.
                                             8. (This has already been
                                             explained in defining the
                                             Japanese expression
                                             “Shicho.”)
19.     P 14. Takes. S 14 probably   20.     S 16.
        would have been better,
        because it would have
        retained the “Sente” for
        Black; that is to say, a
        play which the opponent is
        compelled to answer, or
        otherwise sustain too
        great a loss. Had Black
        played at S 14, White must
        have answered at S 16, in
        order not to lose the
        stones at R 15-S 15, and
        also the corner, which is
        worth about fourteen “Me.”
        To White’s play at S 16
        Black would probably have
        answered at R 12 and thus
        obtained a secure
        position.
21.     R 9.                         22.     E 3.
23.     J 3.                         24.     D 5. This is analogous to
                                             No. 8, but it is not
                                             advanced so far because
                                             Black has already occupied
                                             J 3.
25.     C 5.                         26.     D 6.
27.     C 6.                         28.     D 7.
29.     C 7.                         30.     D 8.
31.     C 9.                         32.     L 3. White has established
                                             the long line on D and
                                             allowed Black a large
                                             territory in order to be
                                             able to occupy L 3. If he
                                             had played there
                                             immediately in answer to
                                             Black’s twenty-third move,
                                             then either L 3 or E 3
                                             would have been in great
                                             danger.
33.     D 3.                         34.     D 2.
35.     C 2.                         36.     D 4.
37.     C 3.                         38.     L 5.
39.     F 3.                         40.     F 2.
41.     E 4. Black compels White     42.     E 2.
        to take 41, in order to
        make good his escape.
43.     G 3.                         44.     F 4.
45.     G 4.                         46.     F 5.
47.     G 5.                         48.     K 2.
49.     F 6. “Sente.”                50.     E 5. Takes.
51.     J 2.                         52.     H 7.
53.     H 6.                         54.     G 7.
55.     J 7.                         56.     P 3.
57.     P 4.                         58.     O 3.
59.     Q 2.                         60.     O 4.
61.     O 5.                         62.     N 5.
63.     O 6.                         64.     K 7. An interesting attack
                                             that determines the course
                                             of the game for a long
                                             time. 65, J 8, would mean
                                             abandoning the position on
                                             G–J (26 “Me”), but it
                                             would give an opportunity
                                             for a bold attack. If
                                             Black played 65, J 6, his
                                             stones would scarcely
                                             survive.
65.     K 3. “Sente.” White must     66.     L 2.
        reply to it, or he would
        find himself without the
        necessary “Me” in that
        group.
67.     K 6.                         68.     J 8.
69.     L 6.                         70.     J 6. Takes.
71.     K 5. Avoids “Ko” and         72.     N 6.
        nevertheless assures a
        connection.
73.     L 7.                         74.     K 4. Is played for the
                                             same reason as No. 66.
75.     J 5.                         76.     N 7.
77.     K 8.                         78.     J 7.
79.     O 7.                         80.     N 8.
81.     L 9.                         82.     J 10.
83.     O 8.                         84.     N 10.
85.     K 11.                        86.     R 10. Now the effect of
                                             the mistake at move 19
                                             begins to be apparent.
87.     Q 10.                        88.     Q 11.
89.     R 11.                        90.     R 12.
91.     S 10. Takes.                 92.     S 11.
93.     R 10. Q 12 would probably    94.     M 11. This move separates
        have been better; at all             P 14 from K 11, and is at
        events it would have been            the same time “Sente” as
        surer, because it assures            regards the black stones
        the connection by way of P           near K, because if Black
        11 after White has taken.            does not answer, these
        If White does not take,              stones would be cut off by
        but plays at P 11, his               W-K 10. Moves Nos. 98,
        stones on the edge of the            100, and 102 isolate the
        board will die.                      black stones in the
                                             neighborhood of P 14.
95.     L 11.                        96.     Q 12.
97.     L 14.                        98.     L 13.
99.     K 13.                        100.    M 13.
101.    K 14.                        102.    M 14.
103.    S 14.                        104.    S 13.
105.    T 15.                        106.    N 15.
107.    O 11. It is certain that     108.    O 12.
        either the eight black
        stones or the five white
        stones must die, and on
        this depends the result of
        the game, because it would
        make a difference of about
        40 “Me.”
109.    P 12.                        110.    P 11.
111.    O 13.                        112.    N 12.
113.    O 10.                        114.    P 13. Takes, “Ko.”
115.    M 16.                        116.    T 16.
117.    T 14.                        118.    O 16.
119.    P 12. “Ko.”                  120.    J 12.
121.    K 12.                        122.    P 13. “Ko.”
123.    R 17.                        124.    S 17.
125.    P 12. “Ko.”                  126.    R 13.
127.    P 10.                        128.    P 13. “Ko.”
129.    D 16.                        130.    C 16.
131.    P 12. “Ko.”                  132.    T 13.
133.    Q 14. Connecting.            134.    P 13. “Ko.”
135.    S 18.                        136.    R 18. Takes.
137.    P 12. “Ko.”                  138.    K 9.
139.    L 8.                         140.    P 13. “Ko.”
141.    E 17.                        142.    P 12. Connecting. White
                                             would have had another
                                             “Ko” at M 10.
143.    C 17.                        144.    D 18.
145.    C 15.                        146.    B 16.
147.    E 18.                        148.    C 18.
149.    B 15.                        150.    D 15.
151.    E 16.                        152.    B 17. Takes. The series of
                                             moves from 143 to 152
                                             should be carefully noted,
                                             as they frequently occur.
153.    B 14.                        154.    C 13.
155.    B 13.                        156.    C 12.
157.    B 12.                        158.    C 11.
159.    F 14. “Sente.”               160.    D 14.
161.    B 11.                        162.    C 10.
163.    B 9. Is not played at B 10   164.    D 9. It would have been
        in order to retain the               better to play at K 17.
        “Sente” without conceding
        too great an advantage.
165.    K 17.                        166.    H 14.
167.    G 13.                        168.    H 13.
169.    G 11.                        170.    G 14.
171.    F 15.                        172.    J 11.
173.    E 11.                        174.    F 12.
175.    G 12.                        176.    E 12.
177.    F 11.                        178.    E 10.
179.    D 11.                        180.    D 10.
181.    D 12.                        182.    H 16.
183.    H 17.                        184.    G 17.
185.    J 17.                        186.    E 13.
187.    F 13.                        188.    G 16.
189.    G 18.                        190.    G 6.
191.    M 17.                        192.    P 2.
193.    P 1.                         194.    O 1.
195.    Q 1.                         196.    L 4.
197.    N 18.                        198.    G 2. “Sente.” It threatens
                                             the three black stones on
                                             J and K.
199.    H 5.                         200.    O 18.
201.    M 18.                        202.    B 10.
203.    A 10.                        204.    C 1.
205.    B 1.                         206.    D 1.
207.    B 2.                         208.    F 10. C 8 ought to have
                                             been occupied first.
209.    G 10.                        210.    G 9.
211.    T 11.                        212.    T 12.
213.    S 12. Takes.                 214.    C 8.
215.    B 8.                         216.    S 11. “Ko.”
217.    T 10.                        218.    E 19.
219.    F 19.                        220.    F 17.
221.    F 18.                        222.    M 15.
223.    L 15.                        224.    J 15.
225.    N 16.                        226.    O 17.
227.    H 10.                        228.    H 9.
229.    K 10.                        230.    J 9.
231.    M 6.                         232.    O 9.
233.    P 9.                         234.    N 9.
235.    M 5.                         236.    M 4.
237.    O 19.                        238.    P 19.
239.    N 19.                        240.    A 15.
241.    A 14.                        242.    A 16.
243.    H 2.                         244.    J 4.
245.    L 12.                        246.    M 12.
247.    G 1.                         248.    F 1.
249.    H 1.                         250.    K 16.
251.    L 16.                        252.    K 1.
253.    S 12. “Ko.”                  254.    C 19.
255.    S 11. Connecting.            256.    D 19.

White wins by seven stones.








VI

“JOSEKI” AND OPENINGS


From the earliest times the Japanese have studied the opening of the
game. Especially since the foundation of the Go Academy there have been
systematic treatises on this subject, and for keen and thorough
analysis, these treatises have nothing to fear from a comparison with
the analogous works on Chess openings. There is, however, a difference
between the opening of the game in Chess and the opening in Go, because
in the latter case the play can commence in each of the four corners
successively, and therefore, instead of having one opening, it might be
said that there are four.

The Japanese masters usually overcome this difficulty by treating a
corner separately, as if it were uninfluenced by the position or the
possibility of playing in the adjacent corners, and in their treatises
they have indicated where the first stones in such an isolated corner
can advantageously be played. These stones are called “Joseki.” As a
matter of fact, these separate analyses or “Joseki” differ slightly
from the opening of the game as actually played, because it is
customary in opening the game to skip from one corner to another, and
the moment a few stones are played in any corner the situation in the
adjacent corners is thereby influenced. It is due to this fact also
that in their treatises on the “Joseki” the Japanese writers do not
continue the analysis as far as we are accustomed to in our works on
Chess. While this method of studying the openings persists to the
present time, one of the greatest of the Japanese masters, Murase
Shuho, compiled a series of openings which correspond more closely to
our Chess openings; that is to say, the game is commenced, as in actual
play, all over the board, and is not confined to the study of one
corner as in the case of the conventional “Joseki.” Korschelt, in his
work on the game, inserts about fifty of these openings by Murase
Shuho, with notes that were prepared by the Japanese master especially
for the use of foreigners, and I have selected a few of these in
addition to the collection of “Joseki” which we will first consider.

The work from which my “Joseki” have been selected was compiled by
Inouye Hoshin, and published in November, 1905. It was originally
written for the “Nippon Shimbun,” a newspaper published in Tokio. Of
course, the annotations accompanying these “Joseki” are not the
original ones from the Japanese text. Many of the things which I point
out would be regarded as trite and obvious to a good player, and my
annotations are intended solely to aid beginners in understanding some
of the reasons for the moves given. It must also be understood that the
series of “Joseki” which I have inserted falls far short of
completeness. In a Japanese work on the game there would be at least
five times as many.

Although the “Joseki” have been studied by the Japanese masters from
the earliest times, it does not mean that the ordinary player in Japan
is familiar with them; just as in this country we find a majority of
Chess players have a very limited acquaintance with the Chess openings,
so in Japan many players attain a fair degree of skill without a
thorough acquaintance with the “Joseki.” It would certainly very
greatly aid the beginner in attaining proficiency if he were to study
these examples, and follow them as nearly as possible in actual play.

It would seem to us that in compiling a work on “Joseki,” or openings,
we would commence with the openings where no handicap is given, and
later study those where there were handicaps; it is another instance of
the divergent way in which the Japanese do things that they do just the
opposite, and commence their treatises with the study of openings where
handicaps are given. Inasmuch as this is a book on a Japanese subject,
I shall follow their example and shall commence the study of “Joseki”
in games where Black has a handicap.

As we have already seen, the handicap stone is always placed on a
certain fixed point, which is the fourth intersection from the edge of
the board in each direction, and White has five recognized methods of
playing his first stone in relation to such handicap stone. These are
called “Kogeima kakari,” “Ogeima kakari,” “Daidaigeima kakari,” “Ikken
taka kakari,” “Nikken taka kakari.” We shall take up examples of these
in their order.





I

Handicap

Plate 19 (A)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 14. “Kogeima kakari.”      2.      N 17. This move supports
        This is the most usual               the handicap stone and
        move for attacking the               also gains as much ground
        corner. The purpose of               as possible for Black.
        White’s first move is to             Beginners would generally
        lay a basis for future               find O 17 more safe and
        aggression; he cannot, of            conservative.
        course, play in the corner
        immediately, neither can
        he play nearer the black
        stone with advantage.
3.      R 17. This is a direct       4.      R 16. Black plays to
        attack on the corner.                prevent the connection of
        White can either connect             the white stones.
        with his first stone or
        form a living group in the
        corner.
5.      S 16. White threatens to     6.      S 15. Black breaks the
        connect.                             connection by this move.
7.      S 17. White cannot play at   8.      R 15. Black also must
        R 15 at this time because            connect. Beginners are
        he would lose the stone at           prone to neglect these
        S 16.                                necessary connecting
                                             moves.
9.      P 18. Since White cannot     10.     P 17. Black plays to
        connect, he must play to             connect his stones, and at
        form two “Me” in the                 the same time confines
        corner.                              White to the corner.
11.     Q.17. White makes his        12.     O 17. Black must connect
        corner as large as                   to prevent White’s escape.
        possible. This move is
        also “Sente,” because it
        threatens to break through
        Black’s line.
13.     S 14. White threatens        14.     T 14. Prevents “Watari.”
        “Watari,” and again Black
        must reply at once.
        (“Sente.”)
15.     Q 14. To confine Black’s     16.     P 15. An important
        group and prepare for                defensive move. Otherwise
        territory on the right               White could almost envelop
        side of the board.                   the black stones.

Even game. White has a small territory in the corner, but Black has
greater possibility of expansion.





II

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 14.                        2.      N 17.
3.      R 17.                        4.      R 16.
5.      Q 17. In place of trying     6.      P 16. Black prevents White
        to connect as before,                from getting out.
        White threatens to extend
        in the other direction.
7.      S 16. Threatens to connect   8.      S 15. Black stops it
        again.                               again.
9.      S 17.                        10.     R 15.
11.     O 18. White again must       12.     O 17.
        form “Me” in the corner.
13.     N 18. White extends as far   14.     M 18. Black stops the
        as possible.                         advance.
15.     P 17. White must look out    16.     M 17. Black must connect.
        for the safety of the
        stones at N and O 18.
17.     P 14. To prevent Black’s     18.     O 14. Black extends as far
        extension and form a basis           as he can.
        for territory on right
        side.
19.     O 13.                        20.     N 14.

Again White has the corner and Black has better opportunities for
expansion.





III

Handicap

Plate 19 (B)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      O 3.                         2.      R 7.
3.      Q 3. This variation is       4.      R 3.
        called “Kiri Kaeshi.” This
        move does not attack the
        corner so aggressively as
        the preceding examples.
5.      R 4. This is the             6.      Q 5. This is an important
        characteristic move of               move for Black; if he
        this variation.                      plays elsewhere, he will
                                             get a bad position.
7.      R 2. White threatens the     8.      S 3.
        black stone. If Black
        defends White can divide
        the corner.
9.      P 2. “Kake tsugu.” If        10.     S 2. Formerly S 4 was
        White does not make this             given as Black’s move, but
        move, Black will get the             it is not so good, because
        “Sente” with a superior              White replies at R 8 with
        position.                            a fine attack.
11.     S 1. White cannot neglect    12.     R 5.
        this move. If Black were
        allowed to play at R 1, he
        would get the better game.

In this opening the corner is about evenly divided.





IV

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 14.                        2.      N 17.
3.      P 14. Preparing for “Kiri    4.      R 11. Called “Tenuki.” Not
        Kaeshi” on the other side            necessarily played at R
        of handicap stone.                   11. The word means that
                                             Black “draws out” and
                                             plays in another part of
                                             the board.
5.      P 16.                        6.      P 17.
7.      Q 17. “Kiri Kaeshi.” The     8.      R 17.
        effect of this move is
        generally to divide the
        territory.
9.      Q 18.                        10.     R 18.
11.     P 18.                        12.     O 17.
13.     R 16.                        14.     Q 15.
15.     S 18.                        16.     R 15.
17.     S 16.                        18.     S 15.
19.     S 17.                        20.     P 15.

White has the corner, but Black has better chances to make territory
later.



V

Handicap

Black is supposed to have another handicap stone at D 4.

Plate 19 (C)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      C 14. “Kogeima.”             2.      F 16. “Ikken taka hiraki.”
                                             This “Joseki” was an
                                             invention of Murase Shuho.
3.      H 17. White confines         4.      C 11. Black prepares to
        Black’s advances.                    get territory on left side
                                             of the board.
5.      B 16. White plays to take    6.      D 14.
        the corner.
7.      C 15.                        8.      D 13. Better than D 15, as
                                             it confines White more
                                             effectively.
9.      C 17.                        10.     D 17.
11.     H 15.                        12.     C 16.
13.     B 18.                        14.     C 18.
15.     B 17.                        16.     C 13. A very good move; it
                                             shuts White in the corner
                                             and assures Black a large
                                             territory on the left side
                                             of the board.

This opening might be continued as follows:

        WHITE                                BLACK

17.     D 18.                        18.     E 18.
19.     C 19. Takes.                 20.     D 7.

or

17.     C 6.                         18.     D 18.
19.     B 13.                        20.     B 12.
21.     B 14.                        22.     C 8.





VI

Handicap

Black is supposed to have stones at O 4 and Q 4 also; these are called
“Shiki ishi.”

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      F 3. “Kogeima.”              2.      H 3. By this move Black at
                                             once attacks the white
                                             stone and also prepares to
                                             connect with the stone at
                                             O 4.
3.      F 5. White must get out      4.      L 3. “Tenuki”; that is, it
        towards the middle of the            has nothing to do with the
        board.                               corner in dispute; Black
                                             feels he has an
                                             opportunity to take
                                             territory. It is
                                             interesting to note that
                                             if the “Shiki ishi” at O 4
                                             were at N 3, then Black
                                             would play No. 4 at H 5.
5.      D 6. White attacks the       6.      D 2. This is an important
        handicap stone.                      defensive move.
7.      E 2.                         8.      B 5. Black tries to
                                             escape.
9.      B 6.                         10.     C 6.
11.     C 5. C 7 would be good       12.     C 7.
        also.
13.     B 4.                         14.     D 5.
15.     C 4.                         16.     C 3.
17.     B 7.                         18.     C 8.
19.     E 6. White must support      20.     A 5. This is a very well
        stone at D 6.                        considered move for Black.
21.     A 4.                         22.     B 3.
23.     A 6. Takes two.              24.     B 8.
25.     A 3. The corner is now an    26.     B 2.
        example of “Semeai”; the
        question is which side can
        kill the other first.
27.     A 2.                         28.     B 1.
29.     D 1.                         30.     A 8. If Black plays at C
                                             1, the corner will become
                                             “Seki,” as it is, the
                                             white group is dead.

Black has much the best of this variation.





VII

Handicap

Black is supposed to have a handicap stone at Q 4 also.

Plate 19 (D)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      F 3.                         2.      F 4. “Tsuke te.” Again
                                             Black takes the aggressive
                                             from the start.
3.      G 4.                         4.      F 5.
5.      E 3.                         6.      D 3.
7.      G 5.                         8.      G 6.
9.      J 5. White’s best move.      10.     D 6.

Black has the better position.





VIII

Handicap

Plate 20 (A)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      O 17. “Kogeima.”             2.      O 16. “Tsuke te.”
3.      N 16.                        4.      O 15.
5.      Q 17.                        6.      P 17.
7.      P 18.                        8.      P 16.
9.      N 18.                        10.     R 17.
11.     Q 18.                        12.     N 15.
13.     M 16.                        14.     R 10. Black abandons stone
                                             at R 17 in order to get
                                             territory; an amateur
                                             might be tempted to play
                                             No. 14 at R 18, but in
                                             that case White could
                                             spoil Black’s chance to
                                             get space on the right
                                             side of the board.
15.     R 16.                        16.     R 15.
17.     S 16.                        18.     S 15.
19.     S 17.                        20.     P 10.

White has the corner, but Black has practically secured a large
territory on the right.





IX

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 14.                        2.      Q 14. “Tsuke te.”
3.      Q 13.                        4.      P 14.
5.      O 17. White attacks from     6.      R 15.
        the other side also.
7.      R 13.                        8.      P 18.
9.      N 16.                        10.     S 14.

Black has the corner. White has a chance on both sides.





X

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 14. “Kogeima.”             2.      Q 14. “Tsuke te.”
3.      Q 13.                        4.      P 14.
5.      O 17. White attacks from     6.      O 16. Black responds from
        the other side as before.            the outside as in the case
                                             of move No. 2.
7.      P 17.                        8.      Q 17.
9.      P 16.                        10.     R 13.
11.     R 15.                        12.     Q 15.
13.     R 12.                        14.     S 13.
15.     S 12.                        16.     N 17.
17.     N 16.                        18.     O 15.
19.     M 17.                        20.     N 18.
21.     M 18.                        22.     N 13.
23.     M 16.                        24.     T 13.
25.     Q 12.                        26.     S 15.

Black has the corner and also an outlet to the center. White has a
chance to form territory on both sides. Black’s position is preferable.





XI

Handicap

Black is supposed to have a stone at D 4 also.

Plate 20 (B)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 6.                         2.      K 3. This move is an
                                             invention of Murase Shuho;
                                             it would not be played
                                             unless Black had a stone
                                             at D 4. Black’s intention
                                             is to develop territory in
                                             either corner depending on
                                             the nature of White’s
                                             attack.
3.      O 3. White attacks the       4.      Q 6.
        right-hand corner from
        both sides.
5.      Q 7.                         6.      P 6.
7.      R 3. This is a direct        8.      R 5. Black must play here
        attack on the corner.                before playing at Q 3. It
                                             also gives Black the
                                             “Sente.”
9.      R 7. White must connect.     10.     Q 3.
11.     Q 2.                         12.     S 2. This is a clever
                                             move. Amateurs would be
                                             tempted to play at P 2,
                                             which would be very bad
                                             for Black, as White would
                                             then get the entire right
                                             side.
13.     R 2.                         14.     S 3. Secures Black’s
                                             connection with R 5.
15.     M 3. White must extend his   16.     K 5. Black plays to shut
        boundaries or his stones             in White as much as
        will die.                            possible; he also supports
                                             his stone at D 4.

Black has the better game.





XII

Handicap

Plate 20 (C)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      C 13. “Ogeima Kakari.”       2.      C 15. This is to prevent
        This is another method of            White from playing at B
        commencing the attack; it            16.
        does not attack the corner
        so directly, but it gives
        White a better chance on
        the sides or center.
3.      G 17. White attacks from     4.      E 17. Preventing White
        the other side in the same           from entering at D 18;
        way.                                 this secures the corner
                                             for Black.
5.      C 17. This is a “Sute        6.      B 16.
        ishi” or sacrificed stone.
        White threatens to connect
        it with one side or the
        other.

The game is about even; if White does not play at C 17 on the fifth
move, Black gets much the better of it.





XIII

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      N 17. “Ogeima Kakari.”       2.      P 17. Preventing the entry
                                             at Q 18.
3.      R 14. White attacks the      4.      S 15. Very important move
        other side with “Kogeima.”           for Black; if Black makes
                                             a move elsewhere at this
                                             point (“Tenuki,”) White
                                             gets much the better of
                                             it.





XIV

Handicap

Plate 20 (D)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      C 7.                         2.      C 5.
3.      G 4. “Nikken taka kakari.”   4.      E 2. A very important
        This is another method of            move; if Black plays
        attacking from the other             “Tenuki,” White can at
        side.                                once enter the corner.

Suppose Black does not play No. 4, E 2, but plays elsewhere, then the
following continuation might occur:

        WHITE                                BLACK

                                     4.      “Tenuki.”
5.      D 2.                         6.      E 3.
7.      E 2.                         8.      F 3.
9.      G 3.                         10.     F 2.
11.     G 2.                         12.     G 1.
13.     C 3.                         14.     B 4.
15.     B 3.                         16.     D 6. Black must get out
                                             toward the center.
17.     B 6. Threatening “Watari.”   18.     B 5.
19.     H 1.                         20.     F 1.
21.     B 1. By means of this move
        the white stones in the
        corner live.

White has the better of it.





XV

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      N 17.                        2.      P 17.
3.      Q 14. This is another        4.      O 15. Black plays to get
        method of attack, called             out toward the center, as
        “Ikken taka kakari”; it              White’s third move does
        does not give White a base           not menace the corner.
        for attacking the corner
        immediately.
5.      N 15. White also plays out   6.      N 14.
        toward the center,
        otherwise Black would shut
        him in at M 16.
7.      M 15.                        8.      P 13. Amateurs might play
                                             at O 14; the text move
                                             protects the connection
                                             and extends also.
9.      Q 13.                        10.     P 12.
11.     R 11. Beginners might play   12.     M 14.
        at Q 12; this is always
        bad play.
13.     L 15.                        14.     S 15. Protecting the
                                             corner against the white
                                             stone at Q 13.

Even game.





XVI

Handicap

Plate 21 (A)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      M 17. “Daidaigeima”; not     2.      O 17. Black defends the
        so much used as the other            corner from that side.
        attacks.
3.      R 14. “Kogeima.” White       4.      S 16. Black again prevents
        attacks from the other               the advance into the
        side.                                corner.
5.      P 16. White threatens the    6.      P 15. P 17 looks like the
        connection between the               obvious defense, but this
        handicap stone and No. 2,            would shut Black in the
        otherwise Black would play           corner and give White the
        at R 12, with the                    better game.
        advantage.
7.      P 17.                        8.      Q 17.
9.      O 16.                        10.     P 18.
11.     O 18.                        12.     O 15.
13.     N 16. Much better than       14.     Q 13. This attacks the
        immediately taking the               white stone at R 14; it
        single black stone.                  also defends the
                                             connection at Q 15.
15.     R 12. Much better than R     16.     R 13.
        13; in that case White
        would lose both stones.
17.     S 13.                        18.     Q 14.

Black has the better of it.





XVII

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      H 3.                         2.      F 3.
3.      C 6.                         4.      C 5. This is an
                                             alternative method of
                                             defending the corner.
5.      D 6.                         6.      F 5. Black plays to avoid
                                             being shut in the corner,
                                             also it can be
                                             demonstrated if he
                                             neglects this move his
                                             stones will be killed.
7.      F 6.                         8.      H 4.
9.      J 4.                         10.     H 5.
11.     G 3.                         12.     F 2. This is a good move.
                                             F 4 would be weak. The
                                             text move defends and at
                                             the same time threatens
                                             White’s stones on line 3.
                                             F 4 would give White a
                                             chance to play elsewhere
                                             (“Tenuki”) which is a
                                             great advantage.
13.     J 3.                         14.     E 5. Black cannot neglect
                                             this move, or White can
                                             break in with a winning
                                             attack.

Again Black has the better of it. He has a chance to play at J 1 on the
next move. The relation of this stone to the stone at F 2 when at the
edge of the board is called “Ozaru,” or the “great monkey,” and it
generally gains about eight spaces. This is also shown among the
examples of end positions.





XVIII

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      C 8.                         2.      C 6.
3.      E 2. This is another         4.      D 2.
        method of trying to get in
        the corner.
5.      D 3.                         6.      E 3. This is the crucial
                                             move of this variation; if
                                             Black plays No. 6 at C 3,
                                             he gets the corner, but
                                             White gets the better
                                             game.
7.      C 3.                         8.      C 2.
9.      C 4.                         10.     D 5.
11.     F 2.                         12.     B 3.
13.     B 4.                         14.     B 2.
15.     G 4.                         16.     E 4.

Black has the better of it.





XIX

Handicap

Plate 21 (B)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      O 4. “Ikken taka kakari.”    2.      Q 6. This is Black’s best
        This is the fourth method            answer.
        of commencing the attack.
3.      R 8.                         4.      P 7. Black intends to
                                             follow up this move on one
                                             side or the other, the two
                                             points being Q 9 and M 3.
                                             This is called “Hibiku,”
                                             or “to echo.”
5.      Q 10. White defends on one   6.      M 3.
        side.
7.      N 5. White must get out.     8.      M 5.
9.      M 6.                         10.     M 4.
11.     P 3.                         12.     Q 3.
13.     O 8.                         14.     L 6.
15.     S 6.                         16.     S 5.
17.     R 5.                         18.     S 4.
19.     R 6.                         20.     P 4.
21.     O 3.                         22.     S 2. Black prepares to
                                             form “Me” in the corner.

White must now play at O 6 to save his stones on the left side.

This “Joseki” is very much spread out; it is difficult to say who has
the better of it.





XX

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      D 14.                        2.      C 14. Not so good as F 16.
3.      C 15. This is not White’s    4.      D 15.
        best move; it is done to
        confuse Black, and will
        win if Black does not know
        how to reply.
5.      C 13.                        6.      B 14.
7.      B 15.                        8.      B 13. D 13 would be bad.
9.      C 17.                        10.     D 17.
11.     C 18.                        12.     C 12.
13.     D 13.                        14.     D 18.
15.     D 19.                        16.     C 16.
17.     B 16.                        18.     A 15.
19.     A 17. A 16 would not do.     20.     E 19.
21.     C 19.                        22.     F 18. “Kake tsugu.” Black
                                             must protect his
                                             connection; this situation
                                             arises frequently.
23.     B 18. White plays on the     24.     F 15.
        only point to save the
        corner.
25.     D 12.                        26.     C 11.
27.     D 11.                        28.     C 10.

Black has the better game.





XXI

Handicap

Plate 21 (C)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      D 13. “Nikken taka           2.      F 16. Black has a variety
        kakari”; this is the fifth           of moves at his command;
        method of opening the                the text move is probably
        attack.                              best.
3.      H 17.                        4.      C 10. Really “Tenuki.”
                                             Black can play equally
                                             well at C 7.
5.      B 16.                        6.      C 16.
7.      B 14.                        8.      B 17.

Black has the corner and White has commenced to envelop his stones. The
following continuation might occur:

        WHITE                                BLACK

5.      F 18.                        6.      D 18.
7.      E 17.                        8.      C 15.

Black’s last move in this continuation is interesting, because it will
make “Kake tsugu” no matter which way White tries to break through. If
he should play at D 17, White could get through at E 16.





XXII

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      N 16.                        2.      O 17. This is an
                                             alternative defense.
3.      N 17.                        4.      O 16.
5.      O 15.                        6.      N 18. This is Black’s best
                                             move. If he plays at P 15,
                                             White replies at O 18 with
                                             a good attack.
7.      M 18.                        8.      O 18.
9.      M 15.                        10.     N 14. This stone will be
                                             sacrificed, but while
                                             White is killing it Black
                                             gets advantage elsewhere.
11.     N 15. White must connect.    12.     Q 14.

Black has the better of it.





XXIII

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      G 4.                         2.      D 7. This is another
                                             defensive move.
3.      D 3.                         4.      E 3. This is better than C
                                             3; in that case Black gets
                                             the worst of it.
5.      E 4.                         6.      C 3.
7.      D 2.                         8.      E 5.
9.      F 4.                         10.     C 4. C 2 is not so good.
11.     C 2.                         12.     B 2.
13.     E 2. White must look out     14.     C 10.
        for his three stones. B 1
        would be a bad move.

The corner is divided, but Black has better prospects.





XXIV

Handicap

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      F 3.                         2.      C 7.
3.      C 9.                         4.      D 3. Black’s three stones
                                             are now called “Ogeima
                                             shimari”; they are
                                             supposed to be a strong
                                             formation protecting the
                                             corner.
5.      C 5. The point of this       6.      D 5.
        variation is to show that
        White can strike in on
        this move and yet live.
7.      C 6.                         8.      D 7.
9.      B 7.                         10.     B 8.
11.     B 6.                         12.     C 8.
13.     D 6.                         14.     E 6.
15.     E 7. White threatens from    16.     C 4.
        the outside.
17.     B 9.                         18.     E 8. Black cannot venture
                                             A 8, as his four stones
                                             would then die.
19.     A 8. “Watari.”               20.     F 7. Takes.

White has entered the corner and still his stones will live.





XXV

Handicap

Plate 21 (D)

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      C 6.                         2.      G 3.
3.      J 3.                         4.      C 4.
5.      E 6. Instead of entering     6.      G 5. Black tries to get
        the corner, White attacks            out toward the center;
        from both sides.                     this move also prevents
                                             White from playing at E 3.
7.      J 5.                         8.      G 7.
9.      F 8.                         10.     H 2.

Black has a good game.





We now come to the “Joseki” where no handicaps are given. In such
cases, of course, Black has the first move. The first stone is
generally played on an intersection adjacent to the point on which the
handicap stone is placed when given. There are, therefore, eight
intersections on which the first stone might be played. In the lower
left-hand corner, for instance, these would be C 3, C 4, C 5, D 3, D 5,
E 3, E 4, E 5. By common consent C 3 has been rejected as
disadvantageous for the first player, because the territory obtained
thereby is too small. E 5 has been rejected because it allows the
adversary to play behind it and take the corner. D 4, or the handicap
point, is also not used. The other six points may be divided into
duplicate sets of three each, and, therefore, there are only three
well-recognized methods of playing the first stone. These are: in the
lower left-hand corner, C 4 or D 3, the most usual and conservative,
which is called “Komoku,” or the “little ‘Me’”; E 4 or D 5 which is
bolder, called “Takamoku,” or the “high ‘Me’”; and E 3 or C 5 which is
not so much used as either of the others, called “Moku hadzushi,” or
the “detached ‘Me.’” We shall give about an equal number of examples of
each of these methods of opening the game, commencing, as is customary
in the Japanese works, with “Takamoku.”





I

No Handicap

Plate 22 (D)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      D 5. “Takamoku.” This is     2.      D 3. This is White’s best
        the most aggressive of the           answer. E 3 is also good.
        three methods of opening.            C 3 is bad.
3.      C 3. Black plays to get      4.      C 2. Best; if he attempts
        territory on the left; he            to cut off at C 4 he gets
        attacks from inside.                 a bad game.
5.      C 4. Black extends.          6.      E 2. Necessary to secure
                                             the connection at D 2.
7.      C 9. Black takes territory   8.      G 4. White takes space to
        on left side.                        the right.

Even game.





II

No Handicap

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      Q 15. “Takamoku.”            2.      Q 17.
3.      P 17. Black attacks from     4.      P 18.
        the outside.
5.      P 16.                        6.      O 17. White plays to get
                                             territory on one side or
                                             the other; he will
                                             sacrifice one of his
                                             stones on line 17.
7.      O 18. This stone is          8.      N 18. White plays to
        intended as a sacrifice to           secure the left-hand side.
        aid Black in getting the
        corner. It is better than
        Q 18.
9.      Q 18. Black now secures      10.     O 19. Takes.
        the corner.
11.     R 17.                        12.     O 16. An important stone;
                                             it is played to secure
                                             White territory on the
                                             left, also to aid in an
                                             attack on the right-hand
                                             side.
13.     P 14. This is also           14.     K 16. White returns to his
        important as it extends              original plan and secures
        Black’s territory; he                territory to the left.
        cannot neglect it.

Even game.

Suppose Black neglects P 14 on his thirteenth move, we would then have
the following continuation:

        BLACK                                WHITE

13.     “Tenuki.”                    14.     P 14.
15.     Q 14.                        16.     Q 13.
17.     R 13.                        18.     R 12.
19.     Q 12.                        20.     P 13.
21.     R 11.                        22.     S 12.
23.     S 11.                        24.     S 13.
25.     R 14.                        26.     Q 11.
27.     P 12.                        28.     S 10.
29.     R 10.                        30.     Q 10.
31.     R 9.

White has the better of it.





III

No Handicap

Plate 22 (A)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      P 16. “Takamoku.”            2.      R 16.
3.      Q 14. The purpose of this    4.      P 17. White tries to get
        move is to confine White             out on the left.
        to the corner.
5.      O 17. Black prevents this.   6.      Q 17.
7.      O 16.                        8.      R 14. White tries the
                                             other side.
9.      R 13. Black stops him.       10.     S 14.
11.     Q.16. If Black wishes        12.     R 17.
        “Tenuki,” this is good,
        otherwise S 13 would be
        better.
13.     E 17. “Tenuki,” but,
        nevertheless, played with
        reference to the stones on
        line O.

Even game. White has the corner, but Black has better possibilities.





IV

No Handicap

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      E 16. “Takamoku.”            2.      C 16.
3.      D 14.                        4.      E 17.
5.      D 16. Black threatens to     6.      D 17.
        break into the corner.
7.      C 17. Black repeats his      8.      B 17.
        threat; in reality it is a
        sacrificed stone.
9.      C 18. This stone may be      10.     B 18. White must play here
        lost, but it aids Black in           to save his stones.
        attacking from the
        outside.
11.     C 15.                        12.     B 16.
13.     F 17.                        14.     D 18.
15.     E 18.                        16.     C 19. Takes two.
17.     G 16.

This is an old “Joseki” which used to be popular; it fell into disuse
and was revived by Murase Shuho. It is good enough for White if he has
an outlying stone or two in the neighborhood, otherwise it is bad play
for White.





V

No Handicap

The following stones are supposed to be on the board: Black, Q 13, R
13, R 15; White, Q 14, P 16, Q 17.

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      Q 5. Black plays             2.      R 3. White plans to
        “Takamoku,” thinking to              prevent Black’s connection
        connect with stones on               and reduce the Black
        line 13.                             territory.
3.      P 3. This is an error; if    4.      Q 4.
        Black wishes to frustrate
        White’s plan, R 4 is the
        correct play.
5.      P 4.                         6.      R 5.
7.      R 6.                         8.      S 6.
9.      R 7.                         10.     S 7.
11.     R 8.                         12.     S 8. White has now made a
                                             formidable attack on the
                                             Black territory.
13.     R 9.                         14.     P 5. If Black gets this
                                             point, his line would be
                                             too strong.
15.     Q 6.                         16.     Q 2. Important; not merely
                                             to attack Black on line P,
                                             but it prevents Black from
                                             coming to R 2, which would
                                             mean 10 “Me”; it also
                                             prepares for O 2.

White has the better of it.

Variation commencing at White’s sixteenth move:

        BLACK                                WHITE

                                     16.     O 5. Not so good as No.
                                             16, Q 2.
17.     R 2.                         18.     S 2.
19.     Q 2.                         20.     S 4. White secures the
                                             necessary two “Me.”
21.     M 3.

Black now has secured territory at the bottom of the board and confined
White to the corner with the better game.





VI

No Handicap

Plate 22 (B)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      Q 5.                         2.      Q 3.
3.      O 4.                         4.      R 5.
5.      R 6.                         6.      R 4.
7.      S 6.                         8.      O 2.
9.      “Tenuki” at Q 15.

White has the corner; Black can afford “Tenuki” at move nine because if
White cuts at Q 6 Black can still get a good game. In fact Q 15
indirectly defends the connection at Q 6.





VII

No Handicap

Plate 22 (C)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      D 15.                        2.      D 17.
3.      G 16. Old “Joseki,”          4.      C 15.
        originated by Konno Genko
        in the Middle Ages.
5.      C 16.                        6.      D 16.
7.      C 17.                        8.      C 18.
9.      B 18.                        10.     D 18.
11.     B 15.                        12.     C 14.
13.     B 14.                        14.     C 13.
15.     E 15.                        16.     B 19.
17.     B 17.                        18.     B 13.
19.     A 16. This gives Black two   20.     G 18.
        “Me.”
21.     H 18.                        22.     G 17.
23.     H 17.                        24.     F 16.
25.     F 15.                        26.     E 16.
27.     G 15.                        28.     F 18. Important move for
                                             defense.
29.     C 10.

Black has the better of it.





VIII

No Handicap

Plate 23 (A)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      P 17. “Moku hadzushi”; not   2.      Q 15. This is called
        so much used as the other            “Takamoku kakari”; it is
        two openings. It is more             one of the two general
        conservative than                    methods of replying to
        “Takamoku.”                          “Moku hadzushi.”
3.      R 16. Black plays to         4.      R 15.
        secure the corner.
5.      S 16. The corner is now      6.      R 11. S 15 would be good
        safe.                                also.

Even game.





IX

No Handicap

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      R 15. “Moku hadzushi.”       2.      P 16.
3.      P 15. Black plays to         4.      O 15.
        confine White.
5.      P 14. Necessary to prevent   6.      Q 16. White plays to get
        White breaking in.                   the corner.
7.      R 16.                        8.      N 16. Very important; if
                                             neglected, Black gets the
                                             corner, and also destroys
                                             White’s adjacent
                                             territory.
9.      R 10.                        10.     R 17.
11.     S 17.                        12.     S 18.
13.     R 18.                        14.     Q 17.
15.     S 16.                        16.     K 17.

The corner is evenly divided, and neither side has an advantage.





X

No Handicap

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      P 17.                        2.      Q 15. “Takamoku kakari.”
3.      P 15.                        4.      P 16. This is an invention
                                             of Murase Shuho.
5.      O 16. Black cannot play at   6.      Q 16.
        Q 16 without getting a
        very bad position.
7.      Q 17.                        8.      R 17.
9.      R 18.                        10.     S 16.
11.     S 18.                        12.     O 17.
13.     N 17.                        14.     O 18.
15.     P 18.                        16.     N 18. This and the two
                                             preceding stones are
                                             sacrificed; Black
                                             naturally expects White to
                                             cut at O 15. The text move
                                             is a brilliant invention
                                             of Murase Shuho.
17.     M 17. Black cannot neglect   18.     O 15.
        this move.
19.     N 16.                        20.     P 14. Takes.
21.     K 17. Defensive; Black       22.     R 10.
        loses the “Sente.”

White has much the better game.





XI

No Handicap

Plate 23 (B)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      P 3. “Moku hadzushi.”        2.      Q 5. “Takamoku kakari.”
3.      P 5.                         4.      P 4.
5.      Q 4. This is not a good      6.      O 4.
        move for Black and will
        result in his getting a
        confined position.
7.      R 5.                         8.      Q 6.
9.      R 4.                         10.     O 3.
11.     P 2.                         12.     O 2.
13.     R 6.                         14.     Q 7.
15.     S 8. Black cannot play at    16.     E 3.
        R 8, as White would cut at
        R 7.

White has the better position.





XII

No Handicap

Plate 23 (C)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      C 15.                        2.      D 17. “Komoku kakari.”
                                             This is the alternative
                                             method of defense to this
                                             opening.
3.      F 17. Black attacks from     4.      E 17. This is the crucial
        both sides.                          move. White plays thus
                                             first to get a strong
                                             position on line 17, also
                                             to prepare for getting out
                                             at D 15. Two connected
                                             stones always form a
                                             strong base.
5.      G 16.                        6.      D 15.
7.      D 14.                        8.      E 15.
9.      B 16. Black now invades      10.     B 17.
        the corner; he wishes to
        occupy C 17, an important
        point.
11.     C 17.                        12.     C 18.
13.     C 16.                        14.     B 18.
15.     E 18.                        16.     D 18.
17.     G 14.                        18.     F 14.
19.     D 13. Guarding the           20.     G 13.
        connection at C 14.
21.     H 14.                        22.     F 12.

Black has the better position. This is an old “Joseki.” It is not much
liked at the present time.





XIII

No Handicap

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      C 15.                        2.      D 17.
3.      F 16. This is a variation;   4.      E 17.
        the intention is to
        confine White to the
        margin.
5.      E 15. This is to prevent     6.      G 17.
        White from coming to D 15.
7.      H 16.                        8.      H 18. This is a correct
                                             move. H 17 would be
                                             inferior.
9.      G 16.                        10.     K 17.

Even game.





XIV

No Handicap

Plate 23 (D)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      C 5.                         2.      D 3.
3.      F 4.                         4.      E 3.
5.      C 3. This is unusual; E 5    6.      C 2.
        is the customary move.
7.      C 4.                         8.      G 3.
9.      B 2.                         10.     G 4.
11.     E 5.                         12.     D 2.
13.     G 5.                         14.     J 4.

Even game; the corner is divided.





XV

No Handicap

Plate 24 (A)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      R 16. This move, called      2.      P 17. White’s best reply.
        “Komoku,” is the most
        frequently used opening
        when there are no
        handicaps; it is also the
        safest for the weaker
        player.
3.      N 17. This move is called    4.      R 17. White plays to get
        “Ikken basami”; this is              the corner.
        the most usual way of
        continuing: it gives Black
        an attack at once.
5.      S 17.                        6.      Q 16.
7.      R 15. Black must extend; R   8.      R 18. White must do the
        18 would be bad.                     same; he cannot play at S
                                             18.
9.      Q 13.                        10.     S 18. White cannot neglect
                                             this move after Black
                                             plays at Q 13; if Black
                                             had played at R 12, White
                                             could have played
                                             elsewhere.

Black has the better position.





XVI

No Handicap

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      Q 17. “Komoku.”              2.      R 15.
3.      R 13. “Ikken basami.”        4.      Q 13. This time White does
                                             not try for the corner,
                                             but attacks the black
                                             stone at R 13.
5.      Q 12.                        6.      Q 14.
7.      N 17. Black abandons the     8.      R 12.
        stone at R 13 in order to
        get greater territory; if
        he defends it at R 11,
        White plays at N 17 with a
        better game.
9.      R 11.                        10.     S 12.
11.     Q 11. S 11 would be bad.     12.     S 13.
13.     R 16.                        14.     S 15.

Black has the better position.





XVII

No Handicap

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      D 3. “Komoku.”               2.      C 5.
3.      C 7.                         4.      H 3. White in turn attacks
                                             the black stone at D 3; G
                                             3 would be too near.
5.      D 5. Black connects his      6.      D 4.
        stones and shuts White in.
7.      E 4.                         8.      C 4.
9.      D 6.                         10.     C 3.
11.     E 2.                         12.     D 2.
13.     E 3.                         14.     L 3. White can afford to
                                             play for a greater space,
                                             as his stones in the
                                             corner will live even if
                                             he loses the stone at D 2.
15.     B 6.                         16.     B 5.
17.     C 2.                         18.     B 2.
19.     D 1. Takes.                  20.     B 1.

Even game.





XVIII

No Handicap

Plate 24 (B)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      R 4. “Komoku.”               2.      P 3.
3.      M 3. “Nikken basami.” This   4.      Q 5. White plays to get
        is the second variation in           out toward the center.
        this opening.
5.      R 5.                         6.      Q 6.
7.      R 7.                         8.      R 6.
9.      S 6.                         10.     S 7. “Sute ishi.”
11.     S 8.                         12.     Q 7.
13.     R 8. It would be bad play    14.     S 5.
        to take immediately.
15.     T 7. Takes.                  16.     R 3.
17.     S 4.                         18.     S 3. This move is made to
                                             secure “Me” in the corner.
19.     Q 4.                         20.     P 4.

The game is about even.





XIX

No Handicap

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      C 4. “Komoku.”               2.      E 3.
3.      H 3. “Nikken basami.”        4.      D 5. White attacks the
                                             stone at C 4.
5.      D 4.                         6.      E 4.
7.      E 5. This is a bad move if   8.      D 6.
        White replies correctly,
        otherwise Black gets the
        better of it.
9.      F 5.                         10.     D 2. This is an important
                                             move; it attacks the black
                                             stones on line 4 and also
                                             prepares for White to
                                             extend at G 4. C 2 would
                                             be bad, as Black would
                                             play at F 4.
11.     B 6. Black defends his       12.     G 4.
        threatened position.
13.     F 7.                         14.     D 8. White must extend.
15.     B 2.                         16.     H 4.

Black’s third stone at H 3 is now called “Uke ishi,” or a “floating
stone.” White has the better position.





XX

No Handicap

Plate 24 (C)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      D 17. “Komoku.”              2.      C 15.
3.      C 12. “Nikken basami.”       4.      D 12. White attacks the
                                             stone at C 12 in this
                                             variation.
5.      D 11.                        6.      C 13.
7.      C 11.                        8.      G 17. White attacks the
                                             other black stone.
9.      E 16.                        10.     F 15.
11.     C 16. The old book move      12.     E 15.
        was E 15, but this gave
        “Tenuki” to White.

Even game.





XXI

No Handicap

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      C 4. “Komoku.”               2.      E 3.
3.      J 3. “Sangen basami.” This   4.      R 4. White takes advantage
        move attacks the white               of his opportunity and
        stone but not so directly            plays in another corner.
        as the preceding
        variation. It is the
        invention of Honinbo
        Dosaku.
5.      D 3.                         6.      E 4.
7.      B 6.                         8.      J 5.
9.      M 3. It will be seen in      10.     H 3.
        this variation that the
        stones are played farther
        apart than in the
        preceding “Joseki.”
11.     H 2.                         12.     H 4.
13.     D 8. This is an important    14.     O 3.
        move for Black.
15.     M 5.                         16.     L 4. “Nozoku.” It
                                             threatens Black’s
                                             connection on lines M and
                                             3.
17.     L 3. If Black defends at M   18.     G 2.
        4, White replies at K 2.
19.     J 2.                         20.     L 5.
21.     M 4.                         22.     P 5.

This “Joseki” really deals with two corners.





XXII

No Handicap

Plate 24 (D)

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      D 3. “Komoku.”               2.      C 5.
3.      C 9. “Sangen basami.”        4.      C 3.
5.      C 2.                         6.      D 4.
7.      E 3.                         8.      B 3.
9.      E 4. Preparatory to 11 at    10.     D 6. A good move. E 5
        C 15; generally No. 9 is             would be bad, because
        played at H 3.                       Black would reply at D 6
                                             with a better game.
11.     C 15. (Not in diagram.)





We will now insert ten examples of openings, as distinguished from
“Joseki.” As already stated, these are by Murase Shuho. In these
examples Black is supposed to make the best possible moves, and
therefore White always finds himself at a disadvantage.





I

Plate 25

Black has a handicap of four stones.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 14.                        2.      Q 14.
3.      Q 13.                        4.      P 14.
5.      R 15.                        6.      R 16.
7.      O 3.                         8.      R 10. Formerly in such a
                                             case as this Black played
                                             at R 7. This move replied
                                             to White’s move at O 3 and
                                             at the same time from a
                                             distance attacked White’s
                                             stones at R 14 and R 15.
                                             It is better to confine
                                             the last two stones by the
                                             text move.
9.      P 13.                        10.     R 12.
11.     Q 15.                        12.     P 15.
13.     R 13.                        14.     P 16.
15.     N 13.                        16.     P 10. This move is better
                                             than R 7.
17.     R 3.                         18.     R 4. This move is better
                                             than Q 3, which although
                                             it cuts off O 3 and R 3
                                             would leave Black’s stone
                                             at R 10 weak.
19.     Q 3.                         20.     P 4.
21.     P 3.                         22.     N 5.
23.     L 17.                        24.     G 17.
25.     O 17.                        26.     N 16.
27.     P 18.                        28.     Q 18. Black is quite
                                             satisfied to have merely
                                             the necessary two “Me” in
                                             this corner, because he
                                             has a much larger
                                             territory to the left.
29.     J 17.                        30.     C 10.
31.     Q 6.                         32.     O 4.
33.     M 4. This move is better     34.     O 8.
        than O 7 because Black
        could follow at N 3 in
        that case. Q 6 is a “Sute
        ishi” or sacrificed stone.
        It has the effect of
        forcing Black to play 34 O
        8, and later on will help
        still further to narrow
        down Black’s territory. At
        the same time every attack
        on the Black position from
        the outside would be made
        more effective by the
        presence of this stone.
        Possibly it could also be
        used later in “Ko.” Black
        makes his 36th, 38th and
        40th moves in order to
        secure his position which
        is weakened by the
        presence of the white
        stone at Q 6.
35.     F 3.                         36.     M 5.
37.     L 4.                         38.     L 5.
39.     K 5.                         40.     K 6.
41.     J 5.                         42.     F 4.
43.     G 4.                         44.     E 3.
45.     F 5.                         46.     E 4.
47.     G 3.                         48.     D 7.
49.     R 18. Beginners would play   50.     P 17.
        at S 16 or Q 17.
51.     O 18.                        52.     Q 19.





II

Plate 26

Black has a handicap of four stones.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 14.                        2.      Q 14.
3.      Q 13.                        4.      P 14.
5.      R 15.                        6.      R 16.
7.      R 10.                        8.      K 17.
9.      O 3.                         10.     G 3.
11.     H 17.                        12.     F 17.
13.     M 17.                        14.     O 17.
15.     O 18.                        16.     P 17.
17.     K 18.                        18.     L 18.
19.     L 17.                        20.     J 18.
21.     K 16.                        22.     J 17.
23.     J 16.                        24.     H 18.
25.     M 18.                        26.     P 3.
27.     O 4.                         28.     Q 6. This move has the
                                             same effect as R 6.
29.     J 3.                         30.     C 10.
31.     C 6.                         32.     C 4.
33.     C 8.                         34.     E 10.
35.     F 7.                         36.     G 5.
37.     C 12.                        38.     D 7.
39.     D 8.                         40.     C 11. This move is very
                                             important because it
                                             prevents the stone at C 12
                                             from making a connection
                                             with that at C 8.
41.     E 12.                        42.     F 9.
43.     F 8.                         44.     H 9.
45.     H 7.                         46.     H 12.
47.     C 14.                        48.     K 19.
49.     M 15.                        50.     J 5.
51.     K 7.                         52.     K 9.
53.     L 3.                         54.     R 8.





III

Plate 27

Black has a handicap of three stones.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 4.                         2.      P 3.
3.      L 3.                         4.      G 3.
5.      Q 3.                         6.      P 4.
7.      Q 6.                         8.      M 5. The following is also
                                             good.

                                             B. L 5, M 3, M 4
                                             W. J 3, M 2, Q 8

                                             White playing at Q 8 in
                                             order to prevent Black
                                             from playing at R 5.
9.      K 4.                         10.     K 6.
11.     H 4.                         12.     G 4.
13.     J 6.                         14.     K 7.
15.     G 6.                         16.     R 11. Black cannot play at
                                             R 5 without seeing P 3 and
                                             4 cut off.
17.     R 9.                         18.     Q 14.
19.     C 6.                         20.     C 4.
21.     C 14.                        22.     G 17.
23.     C 17.                        24.     C 16.
25.     D 17.                        26.     E 16.
27.     B 16.                        28.     B 15.
29.     B 17.                        30.     C 15.
31.     E 17.                        32.     F 17.
33.     D 14.                        34.     F 15.
35.     M 17.                        36.     C 8.
37.     E 6.                         38.     D 11.
39.     B 14. The ordinary answer    40.     E 8.
        to this is A 14, but this
        time Black cannot play in
        this way since White would
        follow at B 12 and thus
        threaten the black stones
        at C 8 and D 11.
41.     J 7.                         42.     K 8.
43.     H 9.                         44.     G 11.
45.     A 15. Black could not        46.     J 10.
        occupy A 14 on his 42d and
        44th moves.
47.     H 3.                         48.     O 17.
49.     J 17.                        50.     G 2. This move is
                                             necessary for the security
                                             of the Black position, and
                                             at the same time Black
                                             does not lose the “Sente”
                                             by this move.





IV

Plate 28

Black has a handicap of three stones.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 14.                        2.      R 5.
3.      P 4.                         4.      Q 3.
5.      P 3.                         6.      Q 2.
7.      R 7. Formerly in this case   8.      R 6.
        White played at L 3 and
        Black replied at Q 6.
9.      Q 7.                         10.     P 5.
11.     O 17.                        12.     Q 14.
13.     Q 13.                        14.     P 14.
15.     R 15.                        16.     R 16.
17.     P 13.                        18.     O 16.
19.     N 16.                        20.     P 17.
21.     O 18.                        22.     O 13.
23.     O 12.                        24.     O 14.
25.     K 17.                        26.     L 3.
27.     C 14. At this move White     28.     L 5.
        abandons P 3 and 4. If he
        replied to Black L 3, then
        there would follow:

        B. L 3, L 4, L 5, L 6, G 4
        W. M 4, M 5, M 6, M 7

        and Black has a decisive
        advantage.
29.     C 8.                         30.     C 6.
31.     E 14.                        32.     C 15.
33.     B 14.                        34.     F 16.
35.     E 2.                         36.     D 2.
37.     D 3.                         38.     C 3.
39.     E 3.                         40.     C 2.
41.     J 3.                         42.     E 4.
43.     G 3.                         44.     K 2. The importance of
                                             this move, when a
                                             territory merely has the
                                             protection of L 3-L 5, has
                                             been commented on before.
45.     J 5.                         46.     P 6.
47.     O 8.                         48.     N 12.
49.     O 11.                        50.     H 17.





V

Plate 29

Black has a handicap of two stones.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      R 4.                         2.      D 15.
3.      D 17.                        4.      F 16.
5.      C 15.                        6.      C 14.
7.      C 16.                        8.      D 14.
9.      C 8. F 17 is just as good.   10.     E 18.
        Then would follow:

        B. G 17
        W. F 18
11.     D 18.                        12.     P 3.
13.     L 3.                         14.     P 6.
15.     R 7.                         16.     J 3.
17.     L 5.                         18.     J 5.
19.     L 7.                         20.     R 3.
21.     S 3.                         22.     Q 4. This move and 24-R 2
                                             are necessary because of
                                             the white stones on line
                                             L.
23.     R 5.                         24.     R 2.
25.     O 17.                        26.     C 6.
27.     D 11.                        28.     F 12. This move is very
                                             good, otherwise White
                                             plays at E 16 and breaks
                                             into the Black position.
29.     F 9.                         30.     Q 14.
31.     K 16.                        32.     R 9.
33.     S 2. If Black plays at R     34.     P 9.
        9, this move is necessary
        for the security of the
        white group.
35.     C 12.                        36.     E 17.
37.     D 16.                        38.     F 14.
39.     G 15.                        40.     F 15.
41.     H 17.                        42.     J 7.
43.     O 4.                         44.     Q 5.
45.     R 8.                         46.     M 6.
47.     L 6.                         48.     Q 9.
49.     F 3.                         50.     E 3.
51.     G 2. This is a fine move.    52.     K 2.
        By means of it Black is
        compelled to play at K 2
        and White can occupy F 5
        on his 53d move and thus
        escape, whereas without G
        2 White could only have
        played at F 4, whereupon
        Black could have cut off
        the retreat at F 6.





VI

Plate 30

Black has a handicap of two stones.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      Q 3.                         2.      D 17.
3.      C 15.                        4.      C 13.
5.      J 17.                        6.      D 15.
7.      D 16.                        8.      E 16.
9.      C 16.                        10.     D 14.
11.     C 17.                        12.     E 18.
13.     C 18.                        14.     L 17. Black could prevent
                                             White’s next move of E 15
                                             by playing 14–G 15.
15.     E 15.                        16.     F 16.
17.     E 13.                        18.     E 14.
19.     F 15. “Shicho” is            20.     H 16. This move makes the
        impossible because White             Black position secure.
        already occupies Q 3.
21.     F 14.                        22.     C 11.
23.     L 16.                        24.     M 17.
25.     J 16.                        26.     H 15.
27.     G 13.                        28.     J 14.
29.     M 16.                        30.     N 16.
31.     N 15.                        32.     O 16.
33.     L 14.                        34.     J 12.
35.     G 11.                        36.     D 9.
37.     H 10.                        38.     J 10.
39.     J 9.                         40.     K 10.
41.     G 8.                         42.     D 6.
43.     K 9.                         44.     L 10.
45.     M 8.                         46.     N 10.
47.     J 15.                        48.     H 14.
49.     N 13.                        50.     J 3. White could not
                                             occupy this point without
                                             endangering the upper
                                             position.
51.     L 3.                         52.     J 5.
53.     P 8.                         54.     P 10.
55.     Q 13.                        56.     L 5. Black does not need
                                             to further defend his
                                             position E 17-P 10,
                                             because it surely has two
                                             “Me.”





VII

No Handicap

Plate 31

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      C 4.                         2.      Q 3.
3.      D 17.                        4.      E 3.
5.      D 5.                         6.      R 16.
7.      R 5.                         8.      O 17.
9.      F 4.                         10.     G 3.
11.     O 4.                         12.     O 3. From here the game
                                             might continue as follows:

                                                 B.         W.
                                                 N 3        P 4
                                                 O 2        P 3
                                                 N 4        Q 6
                                                 R 7        K 3

                                             but this is bad for Black.
13.     P 4.                         14.     P 3.
15.     N 4. M 3 would be just as    16.     R 4.
        good.
17.     N 3.                         18.     S 5.
19.     J 3.                         20.     C 11. White abandons the
                                             stones at E 3 and G 3. If
                                             he were to play at G 4,
                                             Black would reply at C 11
                                             with too great an
                                             advantage.
21.     C 14.                        22.     C 8.
23.     D 3.                         24.     J 17.
25.     G 17.                        26.     J 15.
27.     J 5. Now the two white       28.     Q 12.
        stones are cut off.
29.     L 15. Black cannot venture   30.     L 17.
        any farther in.
31.     P 16.                        32.     P 17.
33.     Q 16.                        34.     Q 17.
35.     R 15.                        36.     S 16.
37.     P 13.                        38.     P 12.
39.     N 13.                        40.     O 13.
41.     O 14.                        42.     O 12.
43.     L 13.                        44.     R 6.
45.     D 7.





VIII

No Handicap

Plate 32

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      C 4.                         2.      C 16.
3.      Q 3.                         4.      R 5.
5.      R 9.                         6.      O 5.
7.      N 3.                         8.      R 12.
9.      P 9.                         10.     Q 16.
11.     R 4.                         12.     Q 5.
13.     P 4.                         14.     P 5.
15.     M 4.                         16.     M 7.
17.     O 17.                        18.     E 16.
19.     C 10.                        20.     E 3.
21.     D 5.                         22.     K 17.
23.     R 17.                        24.     Q 17.
25.     R 16.                        26.     Q 15.
27.     Q 18.                        28.     P 18.
29.     R 18.                        30.     P 17.
31.     R 14.                        32.     Q 14.
33.     R 13.                        34.     Q 13.
35.     S 12.                        36.     K 15.
37.     C 13.                        38.     E 13.
39.     Q 12.                        40.     R 15.
41.     S 15.                        42.     S 16.
43.     S 14.                        44.     P 12.
45.     R 11. Takes.                 46.     M 5. This move is
                                             necessary because Black’s
                                             position above it has
                                             become strong.
47.     O 13. The continuation
        would now be either 48 P
        13, 49 O 15, or 48 O 15,
        49 P 13.





IX

No Handicap

Plate 33

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      C 4.                         2.      Q 3.
3.      D 17.                        4.      E 3.
5.      R 16.                        6.      C 15.
7.      D 5.                         8.      P 17.
9.      F 4.                         10.     C 11. White cannot play 10
                                             at G 3 because Black would
                                             then occupy C 11.
11.     F 3.                         12.     K 3.
13.     R 5.                         14.     O 4.
15.     F 16.                        16.     H 17.
17.     C 13.                        18.     C 8. Abandoning the stone
                                             at C 15.
19.     C 16.                        20.     R 13.
21.     Q 15.                        22.     N 16.
23.     Q 17.                        24.     P 18.
25.     R 9. If 25 were played at    26.     P 14.
        Q 8, 26 R 8 would be the
        result.
27.     O 16.                        28.     O 15.
29.     P 16.                        30.     N 17.
31.     Q 18.                        32.     R 7.
33.     S 7. This move insures a     34.     E 4. This move rescues No.
        connection between the               4.
        stones at R 5 and R 9.
35.     E 2.                         36.     D 2.
37.     G 2.                         38.     E 5.
39.     D 3.                         40.     D 6.
41.     C 3.                         42.     H 15.
43.     Q 7.                         44.     N 13. This prevents Black
                                             from cutting at N 15 and Q
                                             13.
45.     F 14.                        46.     C 6.
47.     G 13.





X

No Handicap

Plate 34

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      C 4.                         2.      Q 3.
3.      D 17.                        4.      E 3.
5.      R 16.                        6.      C 15.
7.      D 5.                         8.      F 16.
9.      D 15.                        10.     D 16.
11.     E 16.                        12.     C 16.
13.     E 17.                        14.     E 15.
15.     D 14.                        16.     C 17.
17.     F 17.                        18.     G 16.
19.     H 18. This move is much      20.     C 14.
        better than G 17.
21.     E 14.                        22.     F 15.
23.     F 14.                        24.     H 16.
25.     J 17.                        26.     G 18.
27.     F 18.                        28.     G 14.
29.     E 12.                        30.     C 11.
31.     G 13.                        32.     H 13.
33.     G 12. H 14 would be bad.     34.     J 14.
35.     M 17.                        36.     J 11
37.     G 10.                        38.     Q 5.
39.     R 10.                        40.     R 8.
41.     P 16.                        42.     J 3.
43.     P 10.                        44.     P 12.
45.     R 12.                        46.     R 17. A sacrifice.
47.     Q 17.                        48.     D 8.
49.     H 9.                         50.     N 12.








VII

THE END GAME


A work on the game of Go would not be complete without a chapter
especially devoted to the subject of the end game.

On the average a game of Go consists of about two hundred and fifty
moves, and we might say that about twenty of these moves belong to the
opening, about one hundred and fifty to the main part of the game, and
the remaining eighty to the end game. The moves which may be regarded
as belonging to the end game are those which connect the various groups
of stones with the margin, and which fill up the space between the
opposing groups of stones. Of course, there is no sharp distinction
between the main game and the end game. Long before the main game is
finished moves occur which bear the characteristics of end game play,
and as the game progresses moves of this kind become more and more
frequent, until at last all of the moves are strictly part of the end
game.

Toward the end of the game it becomes possible to calculate the value
of a move with greater accuracy than in the middle of the game, and in
many cases the number of points which may be gained by a certain move
may be ascertained with absolute accuracy. Therefore, when the main
game is nearing completion, the players survey the board in order to
locate the most advantageous end plays; that is to say, positions where
they can gain the greatest number of “Me.” In calculating the value of
an end position, a player must carefully consider whether on its
completion he will retain or lose the “Sente.” It is an advantage to
retain the “Sente,” and it is generally good play to choose an end
position where the “Sente” is retained, in preference to an end
position where it is lost, even if the latter would gain a few more
“Me.”

The player holding the “Sente” would, therefore, complete in rotation
those end positions which allowed him to retain it, commencing, of
course, with those involving the greatest number of “Me.” He would at
last come to a point, however, where it would be more advantageous to
play some end position which gained for him quite a number of points,
although on its completion the “Sente” would be lost. His adversary,
thereupon gaining the “Sente,” would, in turn, play his series of end
positions until it became advantageous for him to relinquish it. By
this process the value of the contested end positions would become
smaller and smaller, until at last there would remain only the filling
of isolated, vacant intersections between the opposing lines, the
occupation of which results in no advantage for either player. These
moves are called “Dame,” as we have already seen.

This is the general scheme of an end game, but, of course, in actual
play there would be many departures therefrom. Sometimes an advantage
can be gained by making an unsound though dangerous move, in the hope
that the adversary may make some error in replying thereto. Then again,
in playing against a player who lacks initiative, it is not so
necessary to consider the certainty of retaining the “Sente” as when
opposed by a more aggressive adversary. Frequently also the players
differ in their estimate of the value of the various end positions, and
do not, therefore, respond to each other’s attacks. In this way the
possession of the “Sente” generally changes more frequently during the
end game than is logically necessary.

The process of connecting the various groups with the edge of the board
gives rise to end positions in which there is more or less similarity
in all games, and most of the illustrations which are now given are
examples of this class. The end positions which occur in the middle of
the board may vary so much in every game that it is practically
impossible to give typical illustrations of them.

Of course, in an introductory work of this character it is not
practicable to give a great many examples of end positions, and I have
prepared only twelve, which are selected from the work of Inouye
Hoshin, and which are annotated so that the reasons for the moves may
be understood by beginners. The number of “Me” gained in each case is
stated, and also whether the “Sente” is lost or retained. To these
twelve examples I have added eight positions from Korschelt’s work.





I

Plate 35 (A)

The following stones are on the board: White, S 15, R 14, P 14, L 17;
Black, R 16, Q 16, N 15, N 17.

If White has the “Sente,” he gains eight “Me,” counting together what
he wins and Black loses.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      S 17. This is White’s only   2.      S 16. If Black had had the
        good move; S 16 does not             move or “Sente,” he could
        take advantage of the                have avoided White’s
        opportunity, and he cannot           invasion by playing here.
        risk S 18.
3.      T 16. An instance of         4.      R 17.
        “Watari.”
5.      S 18. White cannot venture   6.      R 18. If Black neglects
        to play at R 18.                     this, White would jump to
                                             Q 18.

White retains the “Sente.”





II

Plate 35 (B)

The following stones are on the board: White, R 9, O 5, O 3; Black, P
7, Q 3, Q 4, R 7.

If White has the first move, it makes a difference of six “Me.”

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      P 2.                         2.      Q 2.
3.      Q 1.                         4.      R.1
5.      P 1.                         6.      S 2. Black cannot neglect
                                             this move.

White retains the “Sente.”

If Black had had the first move, the play would have been as follows:

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      P 2.                         2.      O 2.
3.      O 1.                         4.      N 1.
5.      P 1.                         6.      M 2.

And Black has the “Sente.”





III

Plate 35 (C)

The following stones are on the board: White, B 16, C 14, E 15; Black,
C 17, D 16, E 16, G 17.

If White has the move, it makes a difference of seven “Me.”

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      B 17. White dare not go to   2.      B 18.
        B 18 because he would be
        cut off eventually at B
        15.
3.      A 18.                        4.      C 18.

White retains the “Sente.”





IV

Plate 35 (D)

The following stones are on the board: White, B 8, C 7, C 8, D 6, E 2,
E 6, F 3, F 5; Black, B 6, B 7, C 6, D 2, 3, 4, 5.

If White has the move, it makes a difference of four “Me.”

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      B 4. This stone is           2.      B 3. Black’s best move
        sacrificed, but there is             because it defends the
        no loss because it is so             connection at C 5, and
        threatening that Black               also prevents White from
        must play twice in order             trying to connect at D 1.
        to make his position
        secure, meanwhile White
        advances on line A.
3.      A 7. White gains one “Me”    4.      A 6.
        by this move.
5.      A 8.                         6.      C 4. Necessary because the
                                             connection at C 5 is now
                                             in immediate danger, but
                                             Black thereby fills up
                                             another of his “Me,” and
                                             White retains the “Sente.”





V

Plate 36 (A)

The following stones are on the board: White, M 16, M 17, M 18, N 16, O
15, P 14, R 14; Black, N 17, N 18, O 16, P 16, Q 16, R 16.

If White has the “Sente,” it makes a difference of six “Me.”

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      N 19.                        2.      O 18. Black cannot stop
                                             the invasion at O 19, as
                                             White would then play at O
                                             18 and kill the black
                                             stones on line N.
3.      O 19. White pushes his       4.      P 19. Black can now arrest
        invasion farther.                    the advance.
5.      M 19.                        6.      P 18.

White retains the “Sente.”





VI

Plate 36 (B)

The following stones are on the board: Black, M 2, M 3, N 3, N 4, O 4,
Q 4, R 4, S 4; White, L 3, N 2, O 2, O 3, P 3, R 2, S 3, R 6.

Black has the “Sente” and gains nine “Me.”

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      T 3.                         2.      Q 2. The obvious answer is
                                             at T 2, but if White plays
                                             there, Black replies at Q
                                             2 and White loses all his
                                             stones unless he can win
                                             by “Ko.” He plays at Q 2
                                             in order to form the
                                             necessary two “Me.”
3.      S 2. Black proceeds with     4.      P 1. If White tries to
        his invasion.                        save his stone by playing
                                             at R 3, Black replies at P
                                             1, and the white group is
                                             dead.

Black retains the “Sente.”





VII

Plate 36 (C)

The following stones are on the board: Black, B 17, C 17, D 16, G 17;
White, B 16, C 13.

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      B 14. This move is really    2.      C 14. C 15 is not so good.
        “Go te”; that is to say,
        White is not forced to
        reply to it, but it is
        very advantageous for
        Black, as it effectively
        separates White’s two
        stones.
3.      B 15. The white stone at B
        16 is now hopeless.

Black has given up the “Sente,” but has gained considerable ground.





VIII

Plate 36 (D)

The following stones are on the board: Black, C 4, D 4, E 4, C 7;
White, C 3, D 3, E 3, F 3.

Black has the move.

        BLACK                                WHITE

1.      B 3.                         2.      B 2.
3.      B 4.

These moves seem obvious, but the importance of Black’s opportunity is
likely to be underestimated; Black gains about eleven “Me” by this
play. If the opposing lines extend one space nearer the edge of the
board, the territory gained by a similar attack is not nearly so great.





IX

Plate 37 (A)

The following stones are on the board: White, M 16, N 16, N 18, O 17, P
18, Q 17, 18; Black, N 15, O 15, 16, P 16, 17, Q 16, R 12, R 17.

White has the move.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      S 17.                        2.      S 16.
3.      R 18.                        4.      R 16.
5.      T 18.

White has given up the “Sente,” but these moves make a difference in
his favor of about fourteen “Me.”





X

Plate 37 (B)

The following stones are on the board: White, M 3, O 3, P 2, Q 3, R 2;
Black, N 4, O 4, Q 5, R 3, R 4.

White has the move.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      S 2.

This move is really “Go te,” but if Black neglects to answer it, White
can then jump to T 5. This jump is called by a special name “O zaru,”
or the “big monkey,” and would gain about eight “Me” for White.





XI

Plate 37 (C)

The following stones are on the board: White, C 15, D 15, E 15, 16;
Black, C 16, D 16, E 17, 18, F 16, G 17.

White has the move.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      B 16.                        2.      B 17.
3.      B 15.

White has given up the “Sente” and has gained somewhat, but if Black
now neglects to defend and plays elsewhere, White can jump to B 18, and
gain about seventeen “Me” altogether.





XII

Plate 37 (D)

The following stones are on the board: White, B 8, C 7, 11, D 5, 6, 7,
E 6; Black, B 7, C 5, 6, D 3, 4, E 4, 5.

White has the move.

        WHITE                                BLACK

1.      B 6.                         2.      B 5.
3.      A 7. Takes.

White has given up the “Sente,” but this method of play gains about
fourteen “Me,” as it is now no longer necessary to protect the
connection at C 8.





We will now insert two plates from Korschelt’s book. The notes at the
foot of the illustrations are his.








VIII

PROBLEMS


After the student has become familiar with the rules and the methods of
play, and perhaps has played a few games either with another beginner
or with a Japanese master, the impression left on the mind is likely to
be that the game is too vague, and that there is too wide a latitude of
choice of positions where stones may be placed. This impression might
be corrected by the study of illustrative games, or of “Joseki” and end
positions, but such a course is rather dry and uninteresting, and, in
the opinion of the author, by far the best way of attaining a correct
idea of the game is by means of problems.

Many of us are familiar with Chess problems, and I think Chess players
will agree that they benefit the student of Chess very little, because
the assumed positions are not such as arise frequently in actual play.
The opposite is the case in regard to Go problems. These are for the
most part taken from actual games, and the typical problem is a
situation that is quite likely to arise in actual play, and some of
them are positions that occur again and again.

If the student of the game will set up these positions from the text
and attempt to solve them, preferably with the aid and encouragement of
some friend, he will find that the task is an interesting one, and he
will be impressed by the great accuracy which is necessary in attacking
and defending difficult positions.

With the knowledge obtained in this way, he will be able to judge with
far greater skill what to do when a position is threatened in actual
play. He will be able to distinguish whether the danger is real, and
whether it is, therefore, necessary to reply to his adversary’s attack,
or whether he can afford to ignore it and assume the “Sente” in some
other part of the board. He will also be able to perceive when an
adversary’s group is vulnerable so that it will be profitable to attack
it.

The collection of problems which I have given in this book are
rearranged from Korschelt’s work, and they were in turn taken by him
from a Japanese treatise called “Go Kiyo Shiyu Miyo.” Necessarily the
collection here given is a very small one, but if any reader of this
book becomes so much interested in the game that he desires to study
other examples, he will doubtless find some Japanese acquaintance who
can supply him with further material, as the Japanese literature of the
game contains large collections.

The most important kind of problems are those in which the question is
how to kill an adversary’s group, or how to save one’s own group when
threatened. It is also often very important to know how a connection
between two groups can be forced.

For greater clearness these problems are arranged under seven heads; to
wit,

1.  Saving Threatened Groups.

2.  Killing Groups.

3.  Playing for “Ko.”

    The advantage gained by this operation is not apparent in the group
    itself, but depends upon which player has the larger threatened
    group elsewhere.

4.  Reciprocal Attacks or “Semeai.”

    This is a combination of the first two kinds of problems, and it
    only differs from them in that both players have comparatively
    strong groups which are so intertwined that both cannot live, and
    the question is, which can kill the other first.

5.  Connecting Groups.

    The problem here is to force a connection between a small group
    having insufficient “Me” and some larger group.

6.  “Oi otoshi.”

    This really means a “robber’s attack.” It arises where a group is
    apparently engulfed by the opponent, and when, by adding further
    stones to it which the opponent must take, the threatened player
    can force his opponent to abandon a part of his surrounding chain
    in order not to sustain greater losses. The attack is so sudden and
    unexpected that the Japanese compare it to the methods of a
    highwayman. It is an example of the finest play in the game.

7.  Cutting.

    This is another method of escape, and the problem is to cut off and
    kill part of the adversary’s surrounding chain.



In the following examples the side having the first move is given in
italics.





I. SAVING THREATENED GROUPS

1.  (Plate 40, A) White, Q 18, R 18, S 16, 17, 18.
    Black, O 17, P 18, Q 17, R 15, 17, S 15.

2.  (Plate 40, B) White, O 3, Q 3, 4, R 3, 5, S 5.
    Black, R 2, 4, S 3, 4.

3.  (Plate 40, C) White, A 14, B 11, 13, C 13, 14, 15, 17, D 17, 18,
    E 16, F 17.
    Black, A 13, B 14, 15, 17, 18, C 16, 18.

4.  (Plate 40, D) White, B 3, C 3, D 2, E 2.
    Black, B 4, C 4, D 3, E 3, F 2, G 3.

5.  White, B 5, C 4, D 5, E 2, 3, 4, G 2.
    Black, B 3, 4, D 2, 3, E 1.

6.  White, B 12, 13, 15, 16, C 13, 15, D 13, 14.
    Black, A 16, B 11, 17, C 10, 12, 16, D 12, 15, 16, E 13, 14.

7.  White, M 16, 17, N 16, O 15, 17, P 14, 17, Q 18, R 14, S 15.
    Black, N 17, O 16, P 16, Q 16, R 16, S 16, 18.

8.  White, O 1, P 2, Q 2, 3, R 3, S 3, 4.
    Black, N 2, O 2, P 1, 3, 4, Q 4, R 4, 6, S 5, T 4.

9.  White, A 4, B 5, 6, C 4, D 5, E 2, 3, 4.
    Black, A 5, B 3, 4, C 3, D 2, 3.

10. White, B 15, 16, C 17, 18, D 18.
    Black, A 15, B 14, C 14, 15, 16, D 17, E 17, 18.

11. White, L 18, M 16, 17, N 14, 18, O 13, 19, P 18, Q 12, 13, 17, 18,
    R 12, 14, 18, S 14, 17, 19.
    Black, N 17, O 15, 17, 18, P 14, 17, Q 14, 15, 16, R 13, 16, 17,
    S 13, 18.

12. White, Q 3, R 2, 3, S 3.
    Black, P 2, 3, 5, Q 2, 4, R 5, 7.

13. White, B 2, C 3, D 1, 3, E 2.
    Black, B 4, C 5, D 4, E 3, 4, F 1, 2, G 3.

14. White, A 16, B 15, C 15, 16, D 17, E 17, F 18, G 18.
    Black, B 16, 17, C 17, D 18, E 18, F 19.

15. White, Q 15, R 14, 15, 16, S 17.
    Black, P 15, 17, Q 13, 14, 16, R 11, 12, 17, 18.

16. White, R 3, 4, 5, S 2.
    Black, O 3, P 3, Q 4, 6, R 6, S 6, T 3.

17. White, B 4, C 3, 4, 5, E 4, F 2, 3, H 2.
    Black, B 3, C 2, D 3, E 2, F 1.

18. White, C 13, 15, 16, 17, E 14, 15, 16.
    Black, B 14, 15, C 12, 14, D 13, 17, E 12, 17, F 15, 16, G 13.

19. White, M 17, N 18, O 17, 19, P 15, 17, R 14, 16, S 16.
    Black, O 18, P 18, Q 16, 17, R 17, S 17.

20. White, P 2, 3, 6, Q 2, 4, R 2, 4, 6, 7.
    Black, Q 3, R 1, 3, 9, S 2, 4, 5.

21. White, B 13, 14, 16, C 13, D 13, 14, 15, 18, E 16, 17.
    Black, B 15, C 14, 15, 17, 18, D 16.

22. White, C 7, D 3, 5, 6, E 2, 3, 7, F 5.
    Black, C 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, D 2, E 8, F 2, 8, G 3, 5, 6, J 3.

23. White, O 2, 3, 4, 6, Q 4, R 4, 6, S 5, T 4.
    Black, P 2, 3, R 3, S 3, 4.

24. White, Q 17, R 16, 17, S 18.
    Black, N 17, O 17, P 16, Q 16, R 15, S 16, 17.





II. KILLING GROUPS

1.  (Plate 41, A) White, O 17, P 18, Q 14, 15, 16, 17, R 13, S 13,
    14, 15.
    Black, Q 18, R 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, S 16, T 15.

2.  (Plate 41, B) White, P 5, Q 3, R 2, 5, S 5, 6.
    Black, O 2, P 3, 4, 6, Q 2, 5, R 6, 7, S 8.

3.  (Plate 41, C) White, B 15, 18, C 16, 17.
    Black, B 14, C 14, D 15, 16, 17, 18.

4.  (Plate 41, D) White, B 4, C 3, 4, E 1, 3, F 2, 4, G 2.
    Black, A 3, B 2, 3, C 2, D 2, E 2, F 1.

5.  White, B 4, C 4, D 3, E 3, F 2, G 3.
    Black, A 3, B 3, C 2, D 2, E 2.

6.  White, B 16, C 10, D 13, 15, 16, 17.
    Black, B 14, C 12, 15, D 18, E 12, F 14, 15, 17, G 17.

7.  White, P 17, 18, Q 15, 16, R 13, 15.
    Black, Q 17, 18, R 16, S 16.

8.  White, Q 1, R 2, 3, 5, S 5.
    Black, O 2, Q 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, R 7, S 7.

9.  White, B 5, C 5, 8, D 5, E 2, 4, F 2, 3, 4.
    Black, B 4, C 4, D 2, 3, E 3.

10. White, B 15, C 15, 17, 18.
    Black, B 14, C 12, 14, D 15, 16, 17, F 17.

11. White, M 16, O 15, 16, 18, P 18, Q 14, R 12, 15, 18, S 16.
    Black, L 16, P 16, 17, Q 16, 18, S 17, 18.

12. White, Q 2, R 2, S 3, 4, 5.
    Black, P 2, 3, Q 3, R 4, 5, 7, S 6.

13. White, B 4, C 4, 6, D 4, E 3, F 3, G 2, H 3.
    Black, B 3, C 3, D 3, E 2, F 2.

14. White, C 17, 18, E 16, 17, F 15, G 16, H 16, 17, K 16.
    Black, B 17, 18, C 16, D 14, 16, 17, E 13, 15, G 14, 15, 17, J 14,
    15, K 17, L 16.

15. White, N 17, P 16, 17, 18, Q 15, R 13, 15, S 14.
    Black, Q 16, 17, 18, R 16, S 15.

16. White, P 2, Q 2, R 3.
    Black, N 3, O 3, Q 3, 4, R 5.

17. White, B 16, 17, C 17, D 18, 19.
    Black, C 12, 14, 16, D 16, 17, E 18, F 17.

18. White, H 3, K 3, 4, M 3, N 4, O 2, P 3, 4, Q 6, R 5, S 1, 4.
    Black, P 1, 2, Q 3, R 2, 3, S 3.

19. White, M 17, O 16, 17, P 15, R 13, 15, S 15, 16.
    Black, P 16, Q 16, 18, R 16, S 17.





III. PLAYING FOR “KO”

1.  (Plate 42, A) White, O 16, P 17, 18, Q 16, R 14, 16, S 15.
    Black, Q 17, 18, R 17, S 16.

2.  (Plate 42, B) White, O 4, 5, P 2, 3, 6, R 2, 6, 7, S 3, 5.
    Black, L 3, N 3, O 3, P 4, Q 4, R 4, 9, S 4, 7, T 4.

3.  (Plate 42, C) White, B 16, 17, C 18.
    Black, C 13, 15, 16, 17, D 18, E 17.

4.  (Plate 42, D) White, B 4, C 4, D 4, E 3, 4, F 2, G 4.
    Black, C 2, 3, D 3, E 2.

5.  White, B 4, C 4, D 3, E 3, F 2, 3.
    Black, B 3, C 1, 3, D 2, E 2.

6.  White, C 15, 16, 17, D 18.
    Black, B 14, C 12, 14, D 15, 16, 17, E 18, F 17.

7.  White, P 17, 18, Q 17, R 15, 16, S 15.
    Black, Q 18, R 17, 19, S 16, 17.

8.  White, Q 3, R 3, S 4.
    Black, O 3, P 3, Q 4, R 4, 6, S 5.

9.  White, B 5, C 4, 5, E 4, F 4, H 2, 4, 5, J 3.
    Black, B 3, 4, D 3, E 3, F 3, G 3.

10. White, B 15, 16, C 17, 18, D 19.
    Black, B 14, 18, C 14, 15, D 16, 18, E 18, F 16.

11. White, N 17, O 18, P 16, 17, Q 16, R 16, S 16.
    Black, P 18, Q 17, R 17, S 17.

12. White, P 2, Q 2, R 3, 4, S 2.
    Black, M 3, O 3, P 3, Q 5, R 5, S 3, 4, T 2.

13. White, A 2, B 3, 4, C 5, D 4, 5, F 4, G 2, 3.
    Black, B 2, C 3, 4, D 3, E 3, F 2.

14. White, C 15, 16, 17, D 16.
    Black, C 14, D 14, 15, 17, 18, E 16, F 17.

15. White, N 17, O 18, P 16, 17, Q 15, R 15, S 16.
    Black, P 18, Q 16, 17, S 17.

16. White, R 2, 4, S 3.
    Black, O 3, P 4, Q 2, 4, R 5, 6, S 4.





IV. RECIPROCAL ATTACKS (“SEMEAI”)

1.  (Plate 43, A) White, N 17, P 17, Q 17, R 17, S 18.
    Black, Q 18, R 14, 16, 18, S 16, 17.

2.  (Plate 43, B) White, O 3, P 2, Q 2, R 3, S 3, 5.
    Black, Q 3, 4, R 2, 6, S 2, 7.

3.  (Plate 43, C) White, B 15, 16, C 15, 17, 18, D 17, E 18.
    Black, B 17, C 16, D 16, 18, E 16, 17, F 18.

4.  (Plate 43, D) White, B 2, 3, 4, C 5, D 3, 4, 6, F 3, G 2, 3.
    Black, B 5, 6, C 2, 3, 4, 7, D 2, E 2, F 2.

5.  White, B 3, C 2, 3, 4, D 4, E 3, F 3, G 2, 3.
    Black, A 3, 5, B 4, 6, C 5, D 2, 3, 5, E 2, 4, 5, F 2.

6.  White, B 14, 15, 16, 19, C 15, 17, 18, D 18, E 17, F 17.
    Black, B 13, 17, 18, C 13, 14, 16, D 15, 16, 17, E 14.

7.  White, N 17, O 17, Q 16, 17, R 18, S 18.
    Black, P 18, Q 15, 18, R 15, 17, S 17.

8.  White, P 2, 4, Q 2, 6, R 3, 7, S 3, 6.
    Black, N 3, O 2, 3, P 3, Q 3, R 4, 5, S 4.

9.  White, A 4, B 5, C 5, 7, D 2, 3, 5, E 3, 4.
    Black, B 3, 4, C 2, 4, D 4, 6, E 5, 6, F 2, 4, G 3.

10. White, B 13, 14, 15, C 15, 18, D 16, 17, 18.
    Black, B 12, 16, C 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, D 15, E 15.

11. White, O 2, 4, P 2, 4, Q 2, 3, 5, R 5, 7, S 4.
    Black, M 3, N 2, 3, O 3, P 3, Q 4, R 3, 4.

12. White, Q 11, 12, 13, R 11, 14, 15, S 16, T 14.
    Black, Q 14, 15, R 12, 13, 16, 17, 18, S 11, 13.





V. CONNECTING GROUPS

1.  (Plate 44, A) White, K 14, 16, 18, L 18, M 13, N 13, 15, O 16,
    P 14, 17.
    Black, M 16, 18, N 14, 17, Q 14, 15, 16, R 17.

2.  (Plate 44, B) White, N 5, O 4, 6, P 4, Q 3, 8, R 3, 8, S 3, 4, 7,
    9.
    Black, N 6, P 5, 6, 8, 9, R 4, 6, 7, 10, 11, S 5.

3.  (Plate 44, C) White, C 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, D 14, 17, E 18, G 17.
    Black, B 10, C 9, 16, 17, D 10, 13, 15, E 11, 14, F 13, 16.

4.  (Plate 44, D) White, C 2, 3, 5, 6, E 7, G 3, 5, H 3, 5.
    Black, D 3, 5, E 5, F 3, 6, G 6, J 4, 7, K 3, 6.

5.  White, A 2, B 2, 5, C 6, D 3, E 5, 7, F 5, G 2, 3.
    Black, C 1, 2, 3, 4, D 4, G 5, H 2, 3, 4.

6.  White, B 13, 17, C 13, 17, D 13, 16, 17, E 17, F 17.
    Black, B 15, C 10, 14, 16, D 11, E 14, 16, F 12, 14.

7.  White, M 2, 3, P 2, 3, R 2, 3, 4, S 5, 6.
    Black, N 4, P 4, Q 2, 3, 4, 6, R 5, S 2, 3.

8.  White, M 13, 15, N 11, O 10, 15, P 13, Q 9, 14, R 10, 15, S 12, 16.
    Black, O 12, 17, P 12, Q 16, R 11, 12, 13, 17, S 13, 17.

9.  White, B 2, 3, C 2, 4, D 6, F 4, 7, G 3, 5, H 3, 5, J 6, K 5, L 4.
    Black, C 3, D 2, 3, E 3, 5, F 3, G 4, J 4, 5, K 4, L 3, M 3.

10. White, C 12, 17, D 9, 14, 18, E 10, 12, 13, 17, F 17, G 15, H 12,
    14.
    Black, C 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, D 10, E 15, 16, F 13, 14.

11. White, H 17, J 17, K 17, N 15, O 15, 17, P 17.
    Black, J 16, K 14, 16, M 14, 16, N 16, O 13, Q 14, 17, R 16.

12. White, Q 8, 9, R 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, S 2.
    Black, P 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, Q 2, 5, 10, R 2, 7, S 1.





VI. “OI OTOSHI”

1.  (Plate 45, A) White, P 18, Q 15, 16, 17, R 17, 18, S 17.
    Black, O 17, 18, P 14, 16, Q 14, R 14, 16, S 16, 18, T 17.

2.  (Plate 45, B) White, N 5, O 4, P 3, 4, 6, Q 2, R 2, 7, S 3, 4, 6,
    T 5.
    Black, M 4, N 2, 4, O 3, P 1, 2, Q 3, 5, R 3, 5, S 5.

3.  (Plate 45, C) White, A 16, B 13, 15, 17, 18, C 14, 19, D 16, 17,
    18, E 13, 16, F 16, G 14, 15.
    Black, B 16, C 15, 16, 17, 18, D 15, E 15, F 15, 17, G 16, 17.

4.  (Plate 45, D) White, B 3, C 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, D 2, E 3, F 2.
    Black, A 3, B 2, 4, 5, 6, C 2, 7, D 7, E 4, 6, F 4, G 2, 3.

5.  White, A 3, B 4, C 4, D 3, 4, F 2, 3, 4.
    Black, B 3, C 3, 5, 6, D 2, E 2, 6, F 1, G 2, 4, 5, H 3.

6.  White, A 18, B 15, 17, C 14, 18, D 14, 19, E 14, 18, F 15, 18,
    G 19, H 16, 17, 18.
    Black, A 16, B 16, 18, C 16, D 15, 17, 18, E 17, F 17, G 17, 18.

7.  White, P 5, 6, Q 3, 4, 9, R 3, 9, S 4, 5, 7, 8, T 6.
    Black, N 4, P 2, 3, 4, Q 5, R 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, S 6.

8.  White, Q 16, 17, 18, R 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, S 16.
    Black, O 17, P 12, 15, 18, Q 13, 15, R 12, 17, S 13, 14, 15, 17,
    18, T 16.

9.  White, A 3, 4, B 4, 6, C 2, 3, 5, D 1, 3, E 3, F 3, G 3, H 3,
    J 2, 3.
    Black, B 1, 2, 3, C 1, 4, D 2, 4, E 2, 4, F 2, 5, G 2, H 2, 5,
    J 1, K 2, 3, 4.

10. White, A 9, 12, B 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, C 8, 15, D 9, 15,
    E 11, 13, 14.
    Black, A 18, B 9, 12, 18, C 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, D 14, 17,
    E 15, 16.

11. White, H 17, J 15, 18, L 14, 15, M 14, N 15, 16, 17, O 17, 18,
    P 17, Q 17.
    Black, K 17, L 16, M 15, 16, 18, N 14, 18, O 14, 19, P 18, Q 15,
    18, R 16, 17.

12. White, O 4, 6, P 2, 3, 8, Q 9, R 4, 5, 6, 9, S 3, 4, 7, 9, T 7, 8.
    Black, Q 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, R 3, 7, 8, S 2, 6, 8, T 2.





VII. CUTTING

1.  (Plate 46, A) White, C 15, D 17, 18, E 15, 17, G 18, H 18, J 13,
    K 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
    Black, E 18, F 12, 17, 18, G 13, 15, 17, H 12, J 11, 14, L 12, 16,
    18, M 14, 16, N 18.

2.  (Plate 46, B) White, J 3, K 5, 6, L 3, 4, 7, P 3, 5, 7, Q 2, 3, 9,
    R 6.
    Black, L 5, 8, M 3, 8, N 3, 5, 7, O 3, 8, P 2.

3.  White, C 15, D 18, E 13, 15, 16, 17, H 18, J 12, 15, 17, K 13, 14,
    15, 17.
    Black, E 18, F 12, 13, 17, 18, G 15, 17, H 12, 13, J 11, 14, L 12,
    16, 17, M 14.

4.  White, H 5, 7, 9, 10, J 3, K 3, 5, 7, 9, L 2, 3, M 2, 9, O 4, 6,
    7, 8, Q 3, R 3.
    Black, G 5, 6, 7, 9, H 3, 4, 8, J 2, M 3, 5, 7, N 2, 3, 5, 7, P 2,
    Q 2.





SOLUTIONS TO PROBLEMS

I. SAVING THREATENED GROUPS

1.  T 19.

2.  T 2, S 1, T 4, Q 2, R 1.

3.  A 18, A 16, B 16.

4.  B 2, C 1, B 1, D 1, C 2.

5.  A 2, B 1, A 4 or A 2, A 4, B 1.

6.  C 17, C 18, D 17, E 17, B 18, D 18, A 18, B 19, A 12, A 14, B 14.

7.  O 18, N 18, Q 17, R 18, P 18, N 17, R 17, O 19, R 19, P 19, T 17
    or O 18, P 18, R 18, or O 18, R 18, P 18.

8.  S 2, R 1, S 1.

9.  B 1, A 2, B 2.

10. A 17, B 19, B 18, A 14, C 19, A 16, A 19, B 17, B 16.

11. T 16, T 18, T 14 or T 16, S 12, T 18.

12. S 5, S 6, T 5.

13. C 1.

14. B 19.

15. S 18, S 19, S 13, T 18, S 15, T 17, T 14 or S 18, S 13, T 16.

16. S 5, T 5, T 4, S 4, T 2, T 6, Q 2, or S 5, T 5, T 4, S 4, T 2, Q 2,
    S 3, T 4, T 6, T 4, T 5, S 1, S 8.

17. A 3, B 1, B 2, E 3, A 1, A 2, C 1.

18. F 17, G 17, F 18, G 18, D 18, E 18, D 19, E 19, D 16, F 19, B 19, A
    18, B 18, A 17, D 14, C 18, B 17, C 19, B 16, or F 17, G 17, F 18,
    G 18, D 18, E 18, D 19, E 19, D 16, F 19, B 19, C 18, B 18.

19. Q 15, Q 14, R 15, S 15, T 16, S 14, Q 19, T 17, S 18, N 19, R 19.

20. T 3, S 6, T 5, S 3, R 3.

21. A 16, A 17, A 15, B 18, B 19, B 17, A 18, A 19, C 19.

22. C 3, B 3, B 2, B 1, A 2, A 3, B 6, B 5, A 5, A 1, D 4, B 4, B 8,
    E 1, B 9.

23. S 1, T 2, T 3, P 1, Q 1, Q 2, Q 3, R 1, R 2.

24. T 17, S 15, R 19.



II. KILLING GROUPS

1.  Q 19, S 18, T 17, T 16, R 19, S 19, T 18, P 19, Q 19.

2.  S 2, Q 4, O 5, R 3, R 1, S 1, T 1, S 3, T 4, T 3, S 4, or S 2, R 1,
    R 4, R 3, Q 4, S 4, S 3.

3.  B 19, C 19, C 18, A 19, A 17.

4.  A 1, D 1, B 1.

5.  B 1, B 2, A 1, E 1, C 1.

6.  C 14, E 18, C 18, E 17, B 17, C 16, A 17, A 16, B 19 or C 14, C 18,
    E 18, B 18, C 16, C 17, A 16, A 15, A 17, B 15, C 19, B 19, A 18 or
    C 14, C 18, E 18, C 16, B 19, C 19, B 18, B 15, A 15.

7.  S 18, R 18, S 19, R 19, S 17, R 17, S 15.

8.  T 5, T 4, R 4, S 4, S 2, S 3, T 2.

9.  B 2, A 2, C 2, D 1, A 4, A 3, A 5, B 3, B 1, D 4, C 1 or B 2, B 3,
    C 2, D 1, A 2, B 1, A 4, A 3, D 4.

10. A 15, A 17, D 18, C 16, A 16, B 16, B 18 or A 15, B 16, D 18.

11. R 19, P 14, O 13, O 17, N 18, R 17, P 19.

12. T 2, T 5, T 3, Q 1, S 2, R 3, S 1, or T 2, T 5, T 3, S 2, Q 1, R 1,
    T 1.

13. F 1, D 1, A 3, A 2, B 1, C 1, G 1, B 2, D 2, C 2, E 1.

14. L 18, G 18, H 19, D 18, E 19 or L 18, D 18, F 18, G 18, F 17, E 18,
    H 18.

15. S 17, S 16, S 19, R 18, S 18, T 18, T 17, T 16, Q 19, R 19, P 19.

16. S 3, S 2, S 4, T 2, O 2, P 1, R 1, R 2, S 1.

17. B 19, B 18, E 19, C 18, B 15.

18. R 1, N 2, O 3, O 1, M 1, M 2, Q 1, L 2, N 1, L 1, N 1, M 1, T 3,
    T 2, T 4.

19. S 18, T 17, R 17, R 18, T 18, Q 17, T 16, R 17, P 18.



III. PLAYING FOR “KO”

1.  S 18, T 16, T 17.

2.  P 1, O 2, T 2, T 3, Q 2, Q 3, R 3, S 2, R 1, T 1, N 2 or P 1, Q 1,
    Q 3, Q 2, S 2, T 2, S 1, R 3, O 2 or P 1, S 2, O 2, Q 1, S 6, S 8,
    R 5, R 8, Q 3, Q 2, T 3, T 2, S 1.

3.  A 18, C 19, B 19.

4.  D 1, B 2, B 3, A 3, A 2, A 1, B 1.

5.  A 2, B 2, A 3, E 1, B 1.

6.  B 18, D 19, C 19.

7.  T 18, S 18, P 19, T 19, Q 19.

8.  S 2, T 4, T 3.

9.  C 3, C 2, B 1, A 2, E 1, F 1, F 2, E 2, G 1, A 4, C 1, D 1.

10. A 18, A 17, B 19.

11. P 19, T 17, T 18, S 19, R 19, R 18, Q 18 or P 19, R 19, S 19, S 18,
    T 19 or P 19, S 18, T 18, R 18, Q 18, R 19, S 19.

12. R 1, S 3, T 1.

13. C 1, D 2, A 1.

14. B 14, B 13, B 18, A 14, A 17, C 18, A 15, B 15, B 16.

15. R 18, R 16, S 19, T 18, T 17, P 19, Q 19.

16. Q 3, P 2, S 5.



IV. RECIPROCAL ATTACKS (“SEMEAI”)

1.  S 19.

2.  S 4, R 4, R 5, T 4, T 2, T 3, T 6.

3.  B 18, D 19, B 19, C 19, F 19.

4.  B 1.

5.  B 1, A 2, F 1.

6.  A 18.

7.  T 18, R 19, R 16, S 16, S 15, S 14, P 17.

8.  S 2, R 2, T 3.

9.  B 2, A 2, B 1, C 1, C 3, A 1, B 2, B 1, B 5.

10. A 16, A 17, B 18.

11. S 2, S 3, R 2, T 2, S 1.

12. T 12, T 11, S 10.



V. CONNECTING GROUPS

1.  O 15, N 16, M 15, O 14, O 17 or O 15, P 15, P 18, Q 18, P 16, O 17,
    O 18, Q 17, O 14.

2.  T 5, T 6, S 6, T 4, Q 5, Q 6, P 7, O 7, O 5, Q 7, R 5, Q 4, R 5,
    Q 5, T 3.

3.  E 15, E 16, B 17, B 16, D 16, C 15, A 16.

4.  F 5, E 6, E 2, F 2, E 4, D 4, E 3, D 2, D 1.

5.  F 4, E 4, F 3, E 3, F 2.

6.  A 15, A 16, B 16, A 14, C 15.

7.  Q 1, S 4, R 1, O 3, N 1, O 2, O 1.

8.  S 15, T 15, S 14, R 16, Q 15, R 14, P 14.

9.  J 2, H 2, H 1, J 3, K 3, H 4, G 1, F 2, F 1.

10. F 12, F 11, D 11, E 11, B 17, B 18, B 11, B 12, A 12, B 13, B 14,
    A 13, D 12.

11. L 16, M 15, M 18, L 18, M 17, L 17, L 19.

12. S 8, S 7, T 7, R 8, Q 7, S 9, R 9, R 6, T 8, Q 6, T 5 or S 8, S 7,
    T 7, R 8, Q 7, R 9, S 9, T 6, Q 6.



VI. “OI OTOSHI”

1.  T 18, T 19, R 19.

2.  S 2, S 1, T 2, T 3, Q 1, T 1, S 2.

3.  B 19, A 19, A 17, A 15, E 18.

4.  A 2, A 1, A 4, A 5, D 1.

5.  C 2, B 2, B 1, C 1, A 2.

6.  B 19, C 19, C 17, A 19, B 18, B 19, A 17.

7.  S 3, S 2, R 2, T 3, Q 2, S 3, T 5, Q 8, T 7, S 9, S 1, Q 7, T 2.

8.  T 15, T 14, T 18, S 19, T 17, T 19, T 17, T 18, R 19, S 11, T 17,
    S 17.

9.  H 1, G 7, E 1, F 1, D 1.

10. B 15, A 15, A 13, A 14, A 17.

11. M 17, L 17, N 19, M 19, L 18, K 18, K 19, L 19, J 19.

12. T 3, S 5, T 4.



VII. CUTTING

1. G 16, F 16, G 14, F 14, F 15.

2. N 6, M 6, O 6, M 7, M 4.

3. G 16, F 16, G 14, H 15, F 15.

4. K 6, J 6, L 6, J 8, F 4.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GAME OF GO ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
